A protein knockdown strategy to study the function of ‚-catenin in tumorigenesis
Feng Cong*1, Jianxuan Zhang2, William Pao1, Pengbo Zhou*2 and
Harold Varmus1
Abstract
Background: The Wnt signaling pathway plays critical roles in cell proliferation and cell fate
determination at many stages of development. A critical downstream target of Wnt signaling is the
cytosolic ‚-catenin, which is stabilized upon Wnt activation and promotes transcription of a variety
of target genes including c-myc and cyclin D. Aberrant Wnt signaling, which results from mutations
of either ‚-catenin or adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), renders ‚-catenin resistant to
degradation, and has been associated with multiple types of human cancers.
Results: A protein knockdown strategy was designed to reduce the cytosolic ‚-catenin levels
through accelerating its turnover rate. By engineering a chimeric protein with the ‚-catenin binding
domain of E-cadherin fused to ‚TrCP ubiquitin-protein ligase, the stable ‚-catenin mutant was
recruited to the cellular SCF (Skp1, Cullin 1, and F-box-containing substrate receptor)
ubiquitination machinery for ubiquitination and degradation. The DLD1 colon cancer cells express
wild type ‚-catenin at abnormally high levels due to loss of APC. Remarkably, conditional
expression of ‚TrCP-E-cadherin under the control of a tetracycline-repressive promoter in DLD1
cells selectively knocked down the cytosolic, but not membrane-associated subpopulation of ‚-
catenin. As a result, DLD1 cells were impaired in their growth and clonogenic ability in vitro, and
lost their tumorigenic potential in nude mice.
Conclusion: We have designed a novel approach to induce degradation of stabilized/mutated ‚-
catenin. Our results suggest that a high concentration of cytoplasmic ‚-catenin is critical for the
growth of colorectal tumor cells. The protein knockdown strategy can be utilized not only as a
novel method to dissect the role of oncoproteins in tumorigenesis, but also as a unique tool to
delineate the function of a subpopulation of proteins localized to a specific subcellular
compartment.
Background
Wnt signaling plays diverse roles at many stages of development by regulating the stability of ‚-catenin [1]. In cells that do not receive a Wnt signal, cytoplasmic ‚-catenin is bound to a multi-protein ‚-catenin destruction complex that contains several proteins including Axin, APC, and glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3), and it is constitutively phosphorylated at a cluster of Ser and Thr residues at its N-terminus by GSK3. Phosphorylated ‚-catenin is recognized by ‚TrCP, a component of the SCF‚TrCP ubiquitinprotein ligase complex, and degraded by the ubiquitinproteasome pathway. Wnt signaling disassembles the ‚- catenin destruction complex, which prevents the phosphorylation and subsequent ubiquitination of ‚-catenin, thus diverting ‚-catenin from the proteasome machinery. Accumulated ‚-catenin then enters the nucleus, binds to the LEF/TCF family transcription factors, and activates the expression of ‚-catenin target genes. Deregulated Wnt signaling contributes to tumorigenesis. Wnt-1, the founding member of the Wnt family, was first identified as a gene activated by insertion of a mouse mammary tumor provirus, leading to the formation of mouse mammary tumors [2]. Aberrant activation of Wnt signaling, which results from activating mutations of ‚-catenin or inactivating mutations of APC or Axin, has been associated with a wide variety of human malignancies, such as colorectal, heptocellular, ovarian endometrial, desmoid, and pancreatic tumors [3]. Among these tumor types, Wnt signaling is most frequently deregulated in colorectal tumors. APC is mutated in the majority of colorectal cancers, and those tumors with wild-type APC often contain mutated ‚-catenin [4]. Thus, aberrant activation of Wnt signaling appears to be obligatory for the initiation or progression of colorectal tumors. Recent studies suggested that ‚-catenin promotes tumorigenesis through increasing the expression of oncogenes like c-myc and cyclin D1 [5ñ7].
‚-catenin is a "dual function" protein, which is determined by its membrane and nuclear localizations.  embrane-
associated ‚-catenin plays an important role in cellcell adhesion. It binds to the intracellular domain of  cadherin,
and links E-cadherin to ·-catenin and thereby to the cortical actin cytoskeleton. E-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion plays an inhibitory role in tumor invasion [8], and loss of E-cadherin promotes tumor progression
[9]. Nuclear ‚-catenin enhances transcription of Wntresponsive genes through interacting with TCF/LEF transcription factors and recruiting different transcriptional co-activators to the TCF/LEF binding sites.
To study the function of ‚-catenin in tumorigenesis, one needs to develop a strategy to selectively block the nuclear activity of ‚-catenin while leaving the membrane activity of ‚-catenin intact. Such an approach would enhance our understanding of the oncogenic function of ‚-catenin, and might further serve as a strategy for targeted therapy for tumors derived from aberrant Wnt signaling. In this study, a protein knockdown method was designed to induce the degradation of unphosphorylated ‚-catenin, which resulted in the suppression of neoplastic growth of colorectal tumor cells.

Results
Ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis constitutes the major pathway for eukaryotic cells to degrade specific proteins.
This pathway involves a cascade of enzymatic reactions catalyzed by the E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme, the E2
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, and the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase [10]. The substrate specificity of this system is
determined by the E3 ligase. One such E3 ligase, designated SCF (Skp1, Cul-1, F-box-containing substrate receptor, and the Ring domain protein Rbx1/Roc1/Hrt1), is a multimeric protein complex that targets key regulators of cell cycle and signaling pathways for ubiquitination (reviewed in [11]). Among the SCF subunits, the F box proteins serve as receptors that recruit substrates through various protein-protein interaction domains and bring them to the core E3 (Skp1/Cul-1/Rbx1) through interaction between the F box and Skp1. ‚TrCP is such an F box protein that binds to its substrates, such as IÍB and ‚-catenin, through its WD40 repeats. Specifically, serine phosphorylation of IÍB and ‚-catenin is a prerequisite for their binding to ‚TrCP [12ñ15].
The SCF ubiquitination machinery can be harnessed to degrade a specific target protein by fusing an F box protein with a peptide that is able to bind to the target protein [16]. Here we investigated whether an F-box protein can be redesigned to target their usual substrates that have become resistant to degradation (eg, by mutations in the N-terminus of ‚-catenin). Recognition of ‚-catenin by ‚TrCP normally requires phosphorylation of serine residues within the N-terminal DSGxxS motif of ‚-catein [13,15]. To target unphosphorylated and thus stabilized ‚-catenin to the core SCF for ubiquitination and degradation,
we fused the ‚-catenin binding domain of E-cadherin (amino acids 794ñ883, designated Ecad) to the Cterminus
of ‚TrCP (Fig. 1A). A glycine-serine-rich sequence was inserted between ‚TrCP and Ecad to relieve the potential steric hindrance between these two protein structures. Ser37 is one major GSK3 phosphorylation site
of ‚-catenin that is recognized by ‚TrCP [13]. Substitution of Ser37 with Ala abrogates the association between ‚-catenin and ‚TrCP. It has been shown that ‚-catenin S37A is about 9-fold more stable than the wild-type ‚-catenin [17]. The binding between ‚-catenin S37A and ‚TrCPEcad was assayed in 293 cells using a co-immunoprecipitation assay. HA-tagged ‚-catenin S37A and FLAG-tagged ‚TrCP-Ecad were coexpressed in 293 cells. Total cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with the anti-FLAG antibody, and immunoprecipitates were subjected to SDS PAGE and immunoblotting with the anti-HA antibody. As shown in Fig. 1B, ‚-catenin S37A strongly interacted with F-TrCP-Ecad, but not F-TrCP, indicating that the 

Discussion
The stability of ‚-catenin is tightly regulated in normal cells: ‚-catenin is constitutively phosphorylated by GSK3, which triggers its recognition and degradation by the SCF-‚TrCP ubiquitination machinery. In tumor cells with aberrant activation of the Wnt signaling pathway, ‚-catenin is no longer phosphorylated due to mutations in ‚-catenin itself or upstream elements that are critical for its phosphorylation, and thus escapes degradation. We have designed a protein knockdown strategy to recapture nonphosphorylated cytoplasmic ‚-catenin and to target it to the SCF machinery for degradation. This knockdown strategy can degrade both mutant ‚-catenin lacking N-terminal phosphorylation sites and wild-type ‚-catenin stabilized by APC mutations, and it preferentially targets
cytoplasmic versus membrane ‚-catenin. Finally, we show that degradation of ‚-catenin results in inhibition of
colorectal tumor cell growth both in vitro and in vivo. ‚-catenin has both membrane and nuclear functions. To
inhibit ‚-catenin signaling, one needs to specifically block the nuclear function of ‚-catenin while leaving the membrane function of ‚-catenin intact. Methods such as targeted gene knockout mutagenesis, RNA interference, or inhibition with antisense oligonucleotides will eliminate both the nuclear and the membrane functions of ‚-catenin. The nuclear function of ‚-catenin can be blocked by enhancing the degradation of cytosolic ‚-catenin with excess Axin [20,21] or APC [22,23]. However, neither Axin nor APC can induce the degradation of ‚-catenin mutants lacking N-terminal phosphorylation sites, and Axin has an apoptotic activity that appears to be independent of its effects on the Wnt pathway [24]. Another way to block the nuclear function of ‚-catenin specifically is to overexpress a dominant negative form of TCF; this approach has proved to be valuable for studying the role of the ‚-catenin in tumorigenesis [25]. However, there is evidence that at least some signaling functions of ‚-catenin might not be mediated by TCF. For example, activation of WISP-1 by Wnt and ‚-catenin appears to be TCFindependent [26]. Recently, it has also been shown that Pitx2 can recruit ‚-catenin to the promoter of Cyclin D2, and activate the transcription of Cyclin D2 [27]. The F-TrCP-Ecad chimera that we have engineered decreases the levels of cytosolic and presumably nuclear ‚- catenin, but has no obvious effect on the levels of membrane ‚-catenin. ‚TrCP has a short half-life [28](J.Z. and P.Z., unpublished results), so the steady state level of F-TrCP-Ecad in cells is likely low. It is possible that ‚-catenin, when in complex with the membrane E-cadherin, is protected from the action of F-TrCP-Ecad. However, prolonged high level expression of F-TrCP-Ecad eventually affects the abundance of membrane ‚-catenin through affecting the equilibrium between the two pools of ‚-catenin (J.Z. and P.Z., unpublished results). In this study, we have found that down-regulation of ‚-catenin signaling in DLD1 cells reduces c-myc expression levels and impairs cell growth (Fig. 3 and 4) without causing obvious cell death (data not shown). Similarly, van de Wetering et al have shown that overexpression of a dominant- negative form of TCF4 in colon cancer cells causes growth arrest but not cell death [25]. Importantly, ectopic expression of c-myc can reverse the growth arrest induced by dominant-negative TCF4, demonstrating that c-myc is a crucial mediator of ‚-catenin oncogenic activity [25]. We have shown that the tumorigenicity of DLD1 cells appears to be dependent on the concentration of cytoplasmic ‚-catenin. However, this may not be true for all colon cancer cells with stabilized ‚-catenin. Using somatic cell gene targeting to disrupt either wild-type or mutant form of ‚-catenin, it has been shown that elevated ‚-catenin is
not essential for the growth of HCT116 cells [29,30], but is required for the growth of DLD1 and SW48 cells [30]. Presumably, additional mutations in HCT116 cells override the need for an oncogenic signal mediated by ‚-catenin.

Conclusions
We have developed a protein knockdown strategy to degrade unphosphorylated or mutated ‚-catenin, and
demonstrated that suppression of ‚-catenin inhibits the neoplastic growth of colorectal tumor cells.

Methods
Cell culture
The 293 cell line was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and cultured in Dulbecco's modified
Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone), 100 units/ml of penicillin, and 100 µg/
ml of streptomycin. A tetracycline (tet)-off system was used for inducible expression of F-TrCP-Ecad protein. In
this system, the repression of gene expression was achieved by maintaining cells in the presence of a tetracycline
analog, doxycycline (Dox) and the induction of gene expression was achieved by Dox withdrawal. The DLD1-
tTA cell line was a generous gift of Bert Vogelstein [19], which expresses tetracycline-suppressible transactivator (tTA)-IRES-neo under control of the CMV promoter. The DLD1-tTA cells were maintained in McCoy's 5A, 10% fetal bovine serum, 400 µg/ml G418, and 20 ng/ml Dox (ICN). The F-TrCP-Ecad expression construct was generated by cloning F-TrCP-Ecad into pBI-MCS-EGFP [19]. The construct was linearized and cotransfected with pTK-hygro (Clontech) into DLD1-tTA cells. Single colonies were obtained by limiting dilution with medium containing 400 µg/ml G418, 250 µg/ml hygromycin B (Clontech), and 20 ng/ml of Dox for three weeks. Clones with homogenous GFP induction were subjected to immunoblot analysis for the expression of F-TrCP-Ecad with anti-FLAG antibodies (Sigma). 293 and DLD1 cells were transfected with a calcium phosphate transfection kit (Stratagene). 
