Binding of the baculovirus very late expression factor 1 (VLF-1) to different DNA structures
Victor S Mikhailov*1,2 and George F Rohrmann1
Abstract
Background: Baculovirus genomes encode a gene called very late expression factor 1 (VLF-1) that
is a member of the integrase (Int) family of proteins. In this report we describe the binding
properties of purified Autographa californica multiple capsid nucleopolyhedrovirus (AcMNPV) VLF-
1 to a number of different DNA structures including homologous regions. In addition, its enzymatic
activity was examined.
Results: VLF-1 was expressed in a recombinant baculovirus as a fusion with both HA and HIS6 tags
and its binding activity to different DNA structures was tested. No binding was evident to single
and double strand structures, very low binding was observed to Y-forks, more binding was
observed to three-way junctions, whereas cruciform structures showed high levels of binding. VLF-
1 binding was affected by divalent cations; optimal binding to three-way junctions and cruciforms
was 2 and 0 mM MgCl2, respectively. Homologous region (hr) sequences was also examined
including oligomers designed to expose the hr palindrome as a hairpin, linear double strand, or Hshaped
structure. Efficient binding was observed to the hairpin and H-shaped structure. No
topoisomerase or endonuclease activity was detected. Sedimentation analysis indicated that *VLF-
1 is present as a monomer.
Conclusions: An HA- and HIS-tagged version of AcMNPV VLF-1 showed structure-dependent
binding to DNA substrates with the highest binding affinity to cruciform DNA. These results are
consistent with the involvement of VLF-1 in the processing of branched DNA molecules at the late
stages of viral genome replication. We were unable to detect enzymatic activity associated with
these complexes.
Background
Baculoviruses contain double-stranded, circular, covalently closed DNA genomes of 100–180 kb [1,2]. A distinctive feature of their genomes is the presence of homologous regions (hrs) located at a number of positions. In the best characterized baculovirus, Autographa californica multiple capsid nucleopolyhedrovirus (AcMNPV), the hr repeat units contain about 70-bp with an imperfect 30-bp palindrome located near the center, and are repeated two to eight times at each of eight locations around the genome. Hrs have been implicated both as transcriptional enhancers and origins of DNA replication for a number of baculoviruses [3–9]. Hr-containing plasmid DNA transfected into AcMNPV-infected cells appears to replicate as high molecular weight concatemers containing a number of copies of the plasmid [7]. Evidence also suggests that the AcMNPV genome may replicate via a rolling circle mechanism that results in large concatemeric DNA intermediates that are resolved into genome length sizes [10]. All baculovirus genomes sequenced to date encode a gene
called very late expression factor 1 (VLF-1) that was originally identified using an AcMNPV temperature sensitive mutant that failed to produce occlusion bodies at the non permissive temperature [11]. VLF-1 is a member of the integrase (Int) family of proteins which are a large group of enzymes that includes many site-specific DNA recombinases [12]. They are found in a variety of organisms including viruses where they are involved in the integration and excision of viral genomes and decatenation of newly replicated viral chromosomes. The baculovirus VLF-1 gene has been demonstrated to be required for very late
gene expression and evidence suggests that it binds to the polyhedrin promoter region [13]. Therefore, it is likely to be involved in stimulating the baculovirus RNA polymerase to express high levels of polyhedrin which is required for occlusion body formation. The AcMNPV vlf-1 gene may also encode an essential function associated with a putative integrase/resolvase activity [14] and this activity may be involved in the processing of concatemeric replicative intermediates into monomeric DNAs. Members of the int family encode four conserved amino acids (R, H, R, Y) that are involved in the active site and catalyze DNA rearrangements [15]. Baculovirus VLF-1 sequences align with three of these amino acids (R, R and Y but not H). Mutagenesis of the tyrosine residue, that forms a covalent bond with DNA during recombination reactions in int homologs, resulted in the inability of mutant AcMNPV to produce infectious virions, but did not affect activation of very late promoters [14]. In addition, VLF-1 has been found to be associated with viral nucleocapsids [14], which indicates that it could be involved in genome processing concomitantly with DNA packaging. Therefore, it has been suggested that AcMNPV VLF-1 may be involved in both transcriptional activation of very late genes and in the processing of viral DNA. In this report we describe the binding properties of purified AcMNPV VLF-1 to a number of different DNA structures which are predicted to mimic the late replicative and recombination intermediates including those containing hr sequences. In addition, the ability of VLF-1 to cleave such structures was also examined.

Results
Expression and purification of HAHIS-VLF-1 (*VLF-1) In order to facilitate the purification and characterization of VLF-1, the VLF-1 open reading frame (ORF) was fused at its N-terminus with the HA epitope and a HIS6 tag and overexpressed in a recombinant baculovirus under the control of the polyhedrin promoter. The recombinant virus is called vfbHAHISVLF-1 and the recombinant protein HAHIS-VLF-1 is designated *VLF-1 in this report. The HA epitope allowed monitoring of VLF-1 by Western blot analysis, whereas the HIS6 tag allowed purification of VLF-1 using Ni-NTA resin. *VLF-1 was purified from infected
Sf9 cells by sequential liquid chromatography on Ni-NTA-agarose, DEAE-Toyopearl, and heparin-Sepharose
columns. Fig. 1A shows a Western blot of extracts of infected cells at 48 and 72 h p.i. and Fig. 1B shows a
Coomassie stained gel of purified *VLF-1 demonstrating that the *VLF-1 preparation is highly purified. The predicted size of VLF-1 is about 44 kDa. With the addition of the HA and HIS tags, *VLF-1 is predicted to have a mass of about 47 kDa. A slightly higher apparent molecular mass of *VLF-1 under SDS-PAGE (~50 kDa) (Fig. 1) might be caused by the basic nature of AcMNPV VLF-1 which has estimated pI value equal to 9.16.

Binding of *VLF-1 to DNA structures
VLF-1 is homologous to the tyrosine recombinases that are typified by phage _ integrase. This family of recombinases is involved in site specific recombination e.g. the integration and excision of the phage _ genome into and out of the host genome. Since baculovirus genomes may replicate via complex branched concatemeric intermediates, we investigated whether VLF-1 might be involved in the resolution of structures that could result from DNA replication and recombination. Using electrophoretic mobility shift analyses, we tested the ability of *VLF-1 to bind different DNA structures (Fig. 2). Although there was no evidence that *VLF-1 could bind to linear or doublestranded DNA (lanes 1–8), trace amounts of a shifted band was detected at the highest *VLF-1 concentration for the Y-shaped DNA structure (lanes 9–12). Higher binding was observed for three-way structure (lanes 13–16). In contrast, significant levels of binding were found to cruciform structures with the majority of the labeled DNA shifted at the highest *VLF-1 concentration (lanes 17–20). Therefore VLF-1 appears to preferentially bind the cruciform- like structures. To confirm that *VLF-1 binding was responsible for the radioactive band shift, we incubated the pre-formed protein-cruciform DNA complexes with the monoclonal antibody HA.11 prior the electrophoresis. We found that anti-HA antibodies caused the proteincruciform
DNA band to supershift (Fig. 3, lanes 3–6 and 9–12). This result indicated that *VLF-1 is a part of the
protein-cruciform DNA complexes observed under EMSA, because the anti-HA antibodies interact specifically with *VLF-1 in extracts from the infected cells (Fig. 1A) and do not interact with the DNA probe alone (Fig. 3, lane 13). We routinely fixed the protein-DNA complexes with 0.5% glutaraldehyde prior the electrophoresis. This resulted in more distinct radioactive bands in the gel (compare lanes 2 and 8 in Fig. 3). The general conclusions that could be drawn from the experiments with the samples treated with glutaraldehyde and untreated samples were the same (compare lanes 1–6 and lanes 7–12 in Fig. 3). The magnesium optima for binding to the three-way and cruciform structures was then examined (Fig. 4). It was found that, whereas *VLF-1 binding to the three-way  structure was markedly stimulated by 1–5 mM MgCl2 and had an optimum at 2 mM, binding to the cruciform was inhibited by 1–10 mM MgCl2. Although the magnesium ions are not required for enzymatic activity of resolvases typified by phage _ integrase (27), our data suggest that divalent cations may efficiently modulate binding of *VLF-1 to some DNA substrates. The opposite effect of MgCl2 on *VLF-1 binding to the three-way and cruciform structures (Fig. 4) suggests also a Mg2+-dependent adjustment
of protein and DNA structures upon interaction. 

Binding of *VLF-1 to homologous regions
A distinctive feature of baculovirus genomes is the presence of homologous regions (hrs) distributed at a number
of locations around the genome. In many baculoviruses, hrs are composed of imperfect palindrome sequences that resemble the binding sites of site-specific recombinases [16]. In order to determine if *VLF-1 could bind to AcMNPV hr sequences, we synthesized oligonucleotides with a consensus hr sequence that included the central imperfect palindrome and about 20 nt of flanking sequences on both ends [17]. The annealing of the hr-containing oligonucleotide to a full size complementary oligonucleotide would form a linear double-stranded structure, whereas its annealing to a complemetary oligonucleotide lacking the 30-nt central palindrome would produce a hairpinlike structure or a double Y (H-shaped) structure (Fig. 5). The presence of the H-shaped structure in the latter substrate was confirmed by a control experiment in which we observed that digestion with EcoRI endonuclease resolved the H-shaped molecules into products with a mobility corresponding to the hairpin structures (data not shown). We found that there was only minimal *VLF-1 binding to the double-stranded hr consensus sequence (Fig. 5A lanes 2, 3). In contrast, *VLF-1 interaction with the hairpin and H-shaped structures was more efficient, with *VLF-1 binding preferentially to the H-shaped molecules (Fig. 5A,
lanes 5, 6). The binding to the hairpin and H-shaped structures was stimulated by MgCl2 and had an optimum
of 2 mM (Fig. 5B, lanes 1–6). However, *VLF-1 binding to the hr-containing structures at the optimal conditions did not exceed its binding to the non-hr cruciform DNA (compare lanes 4 and 8 in Fig. 5B). This result suggests that under the conditions that we employed, the hr sequence does not serve as a specific determinant for the VLF-1 binding to DNA.
Testing for DNA cleavage and topoisomerase activity
The phage _ int protein has topoisomerase activity in addition to its recombinase function. However, in contrast
to the sequence specificity of the recombinase action, the topoisomerase activity is non specific [18]. In order to investigate the activities of *VLF-1, we tested its ability to cleave cruciform DNA and we also examined its topoisomerase activity. Before analysis of the cleavage activity, we tested our DNA substrates to determine if they were accessible to cleavage with bacteriophage T4 endonuclease VII which efficiently cleaves a variety of branched DNA structures [19]. As shown in Fig. 6, T4 endo VII cleaved Y, three-way, and Holliday-like structures. This indicated that our substrates were suitable for the assay of this structure- specific endonuclease. We focused our experiments on the cruciform structure since *VLF-1 demonstrated

Figure 1
Expression and purification of *VLF-1. (A) Expression of *VLF-1 in infected Sf9 cells analyzed by SDS-12% PAGE followed by Western blotting with the monoclonal antibody HA.11. Lane 1, 48 h p.i.; lane 2, 72 h p.i.. (B) Purified *VLF-1 analyzed by SDS-10% PAGE followed by staining with
Coomassie brilliant blue. Lane 1, *VLF-1, 100 ng; lane M, 10-kDa protein ladder. The molecular masses of protein markers (in kilodaltons) are shown on the left.  maximal binding to this substrate (Fig. 2). We examined  four cruciform preparations that differed in the oligonucleotide that was 5' end-labeled. Despite varying the enzyme  concentration in the range that showed saturation of the DNA substrate under EMSA, we could detect no cleavage of any strand in the cruciforms (data not shown). In addition, we were unable to detect endonuclease activity in the *VLF-1 preparation using hr-containing substrates
at different assay conditions described in Materials and Methods. Furthermore, although infected cell extracts
showed high levels of topoisomerase activity in assays employing superhelical plasmid DNA, we could not correlate this activity to *VLF-1 (data not shown). It has been found that modification of the N-terminus of
phage _ integrase affected protein-protein interactions [20]. Because *VLF-1 was tagged with both HIS6 and HA
sequences, we considered that these changes at the N-terminus may have inhibited the enzymatic or binding activity of VLF-1. In order to investigate this possibility, we purified VLF-1 from a virus called vpolhHisVlf1 in which a HIS-tagged version of VLF-1 under the control of the polyhedrin promoter was substituted for the wt VLF-1 gene. This virus is replication competent as evidenced by its production of budded virus at wt levels [14] indicating that if VLF-1 is involved in the production of mature viral genomes, the genome is correctly processed. We purified this version of VLF-1 and tested it in the endonuclease assay using the cruciform structures, but again, no activity was detected. In addition, when tested in a topoisomerase assay with superhelical plasmid DNA, no activity could be correlated with this protein. 

