Fragile X (CGG)n repeats induce a transcriptional repression in cis upon a linked promoter: Evidence for a chromatin mediated effect
Simon P Chandler*1,2, Pushpa Kansagra3 and Mark C Hirst3
Abstract
Background: Expansion of an unstable (CGG)n repeat to over 200 triplets within the promoter
region of the human FMR1 gene leads to extensive local methylation and transcription silencing,
resulting in the loss of FMRP protein and the development of the clinical features of fragile X
syndrome. The causative link between (CGG)n expansion, methylation and gene silencing is
unknown, although gene silencing is associated with extensive changes to local chromatin
architecture.
Results: In order to determine the direct effects of increased repeat length on gene transcription
in a chromatin context, we have examined the influence of FMR1 (CGG)n repeats upon
transcription from the HSV thymidine kinase promoter in the Xenopus laevis oocyte. We observe
a reduction in mRNA production directly associated with increasing repeat length, with a 90%
reduction in mRNA production from arrays over 100 repeats in length. Using a kinetic approach,
we show that this transcriptional repression is concomitant with chromatin maturation and, using
in vitro transcription, we show that chromatin formation is a fundamental part of the repressive
pathway mediated by (CGG)n repeats. Using Trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, we
show reactivation of the silenced promoter.
Conclusions: Thus, isolated fragile X associated (CGG)n repeat arrays can exert a modifying and
transcriptionally repressive influence over adjacent promoters and this repressive phenomenon is,
in part, mediated by histone deacetylation.
Background
Expansion of a genetically unstable (CGG)n triplet repeat was first observed within the promoter region of the human FMR1 gene in fragile X families (reviewed in refs [1,2]). In the normal population, the repeat is genetically stable and ranges from 6 to 54 triplets in length whereas in fragile X families it ranges from 55 to over several thousands of triplets in length [3]. Expansion to over 200 repeats is associated with loss of FMR1 gene transcription [4], hypermethylation [5–7], late replication [8] and the expression of a fragile site on the X chromosome. Loss of the encoded protein, FMRP, results in altered synaptic maturation (reviewed in ref [9] which leads to development of the fragile X syndrome. Similar expansions of (CGG)n have also been identified at other rare, folate sensitive fragile sites, including those at FRAXE [10], FRAXF  [11,12], FRA11B [13] and FRA16A [14]. In all cases, (CGG)n expansion is associated with a length dependent localised hypermethylation and loss of flanking gene expression. An important regulatory mechanism for transcription in eukaryotes is chromatin architecture (reviewed in [15,16]). Numerous studies have shown the intimate and fundamental role of nucleosomal positioning and associated localised compaction of DNA as a repressive structure often refractory to transcription factor binding in yeast, animals and plants (reviewed in [17–19]). In some instances, nucleosomes have been shown to have a role in transcriptional activation, bringing disparate DNA sites into juxtaposition and allowing concomitant binding of activation functions. Chromatin architecture across the fragile X expansion is consistent with a transcriptionally silenced state, with the region becoming late replicating and extensively hypermethylated [5,6,20,21]. In vitro methylation of the FMR1 promoter region is known to induce
transcriptional repression in transient transfection assays [22,23]. In earlier studies using cloned FMR1 arrays,
it was shown that short methylated CGG repeats have a high affinity for the histone octamer and a highly
positioned nucleosome assembles with the repeat sequences positioned at the nucleosomal dyad [24]. This
suggests that the aberrant methylation found at expanded (CGG)n arrays might target a repressive chromatin structure to the FMR1 promoter region. Studies on the FMR1 promoter in human cell lines have shown that the repressive phenomenon is linked to hypoacetylated chromatin [24] and attempts to reactivate silenced FMR1 genes have had most success with a combination of agents targeting both methylation and histone acetylation [25]. Nucleosomal architecture is known to be modified through the action of remodelling machinery; complexes
which are targeted through the modification of select histone tails (reviewed in [26,27]) and specific factor binding [17]. These can lead to alterations in the functionality of transcription from a particular promoter. DNA methylation and hypoacetylation of the local chromatin environment have been shown to be linked through the action of MeCP2 an epigenetic transcriptional repressor with affinity for methylated DNA [28]. This protein recruits deacetylases through Sin3A to methylated genomic regions [29,30]. No study to date has examined the influence of the (CGG)n array in isolation upon transcription. In this investigation we have studied the effect of increasing (CGG)n repeat length on transcription from a viral promoter reporter construct after micro-injection into Xenopus oocytes in order to analyse the contribution of chromatin to any cis acting effect of the repeats upon transcription. We show that the RNA polymerase II regulated promoter from the Herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene (HSVtk) becomes transcriptionally repressed when increasing lengths of (CGG)n are linked in cis. Furthermore, this repression phenomenon is time dependent and correlates with the formation of chromatin. We show that the addition of Trichostatin A (TSA) can relieve the repeat induced repression. This suggests that the fragile X (CGG)n associated triplet repeat can direct transcriptionally repressive chromatin to adjacent promoters and that local deacetylation of nucleosomes is a major determinant in the repressive pathway.

Results
Reporter plasmid construction
We have developed a model system in which to examine the transcriptional impact of increasing lengths of fragile X associated (CGG)n repeats which allows us to investigate the role of chromatin in FMR1 transcriptional repression. Preliminary experiments with the native human FMR1 promoter failed to produce sufficient transcriptional activity in the Xenopus system (Chandler, Hirst and Wolffe, data not shown). We therefore utilised a stronger promoter, the constitutive HSVtk promoter, for subsequent studies. A short DNA fragment from the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene (CAT) was ligated downstream of the HSVtk promoter to serve as a primer binding site for primer extension studies. Transcripts detected with this primer represent extended mRNA initiated at the HSVtk transcription start site but which have not necessarily been extended through the (CGG)n array. Downstream of the CAT primer binding site we inserted increasing lengths of (CGG)n repeats. These are positioned approximately 140 bp downstream from the HSVtk transcription start site, a position similar to that found in the native human FMR1 promoter [22,42]. All constructs prepared were identical apart from the length of CGG repeat and all were validated to ensure the full length of the arrays were present. This was done because we are aware that deletions in these repetitive sequences can occur and lead to experimental artifacts. Figure 1a shows a schematic representation of the promoter region in our reporter construct illustrating the cloning site of the (CGG)n array. HindIII restriction analysis of reporter constructs containing 27, 70 and 105 repeats is shown in Figure 1b and illustrates the stability of these arrays within this reporter plasmid.

Increasing (CGG)n repeat length correlates with decreased detectable transcript
pHSVtk-CAT plasmid DNA containing increasing numbers of (CGG)n repeats was introduced by microinjection
into stage 6 Xenopus laevis oocytes. As shown in Figure 2a, primer extension analysis of 18 hour mRNA pools
shows that increasing repeat length leads to a gradual decrease in detectable transcripts. In all cases, we were

Repression of transcription is concurrent with chromatin maturation
Another potential mediator of transcriptional repression in the Xenopus oocyte is chromatin. To examine the contribution of chromatin to the (CGG)n linked transcriptional repression, we therefore performed a time course study where pools of injected oocytes were isolated at various time points after co-injection, up to 18 hours, the time at which we observed transcriptional silencing earlier. Results from this study are shown in Figure 3. As shown in Figure 3a, control injections with pHSVtk-CAT containing zero repeats shows that mRNA increases throughout the  18 hour incubation. To standardise for mRNA production we used a CMV-CAT co-injected control and, as can be see in Figure 3a, the amount of mRNA from this control gradually increases during the 18 hour incubation. We performed the same study with pHSVtk-CAT-(CGG)70 as this construct induces transcriptional repression but, as shown earlier, generates a detectable level of mRNA, even after 18 hours incubation, so allowing us to quantify transcription levels throughout the time-course of the experiment. The
transcriptional activity of pHSVtk-CAT-(CGG)70 over this time course can be see in Figure 3a, and is shown graphically after standardisation to co-injected control DNA in Figure 3b. As is shown, up to 4 hours post injection, the two promoters transcribe equivalent amounts of detectable mRNA. However, after 4 hours there was no further detectable increase in the amount of mRNA from the (CGG)70 containing construct. This suggests that by 8 hours, transcriptional repression mediated by the (CGG)narray has become established.
As we suspected that chromatin assembly was playing a role in this transcriptional repression, DNA isolated from the same oocytes injected with pHSVtk-CAT-(CGG)70 and studied by primer extension above was examined on a gel containing chloroquine. As one positive supercoil is added per nucleosome assembled on the reporter DNA [40], direct visualisation of the supercoiling status of the injected plasmid DNA can serve as a direct measure of chromatin formation upon injected DNA. As can be seen in Figure 3c, a Southern blot of the chloroquine-containing gel, it is clear that by 8 hours after injection, chromatin formation is complete, as judged by the stabilisation of the nucleosomal ladder. This mature chromatin formation is concomitant with full (CGG)n mediated transcriptional repression of the HSVtk promoter as shown in figure 3b. This strongly suggests that the repression effect associated with increasing repeat length is causally related to the extent of chromatin formation upon the reporter. Another possibility to explain the loss of detectable transcript over time, is that the mRNA produced from reporters with longer repeats might have an inherent instability giving rise to a shorter half life. This seems unlikely as other studies on native FMR1 transcripts noted no appreciable difference in mRNA stability over the repeat lengths used in this study [43].

Repeat induced transciptional repression is dependant on histone deactylases
To examine the nature of the chromatin – mediated repression, we analysed the effect of the global deacetylase
inhibitor TSA on the transcriptional activity of the CGG140 containing reporter. As can be seen in figure 4c, in the absence of TSA, the CGG140 mRNA is undetectable, the band in the correct location on the gel is also present in the CMV-CAT control lanes, and hence is not reporter specific. The addition of 30 nM TSA leads to an almost complete reactivation of the CGG140 reporter to transcription levels approaching or surpassing that seen with the wild type CGG27construct (Fig 2a). These results suggest an integral role for deacetylation of nucleosomes in the repressive mechanism mediated by isolated CGG repeats.

Discussion
We have shown that (CGG)n lengths in excess of 70 repeats can repress transcription from the HSVtk promoter
in Xenopus laevis oocytes. They appear to do so in a length dependent manner, with arrays over (CGG)105 leading to over 90% transcriptional repression. We have shown that this transcriptional repression occurs in a time dependent manner and is established by eight hours after injection. Analysis of chromatin formation indicates a correlation between maximal transcriptional repression and full chromatinisation of the injected DNA. Using a HeLa nuclear extract we show that (CGG)n arrays ranging from 27 to 140 triplets in length do not directly interfere with RNA polymerase II transcription. This strongly suggests that repression is mediated by the assembly of transcriptionally repressive chromatin over the HSVtk promoter and that this is directed by the (CGG)n array, in a length dependent manner. We show that TSA can relieve the repression associated with longer repeat length suggesting an integral role for histone deacteylation in the repressive pathway. The results of this study are in contrast to the status of FMR1 gene transcription in fragile X carrier individuals with (CGG)n arrays between 55 and 200 repeats. In these individuals, the FMR1 gene is not only transcriptionally
active, but appears to be producing elevated levels of mRNA, up to five times the wild type levels of mRNA for the longer arrays [43,44]. There are several possible explanations for this disparity. Firstly, it may simply reflect an intrinsic feature of the experimental system we are using, in that the HSVtk promoter within our construct and within the components present in the Xenopus oocyte is more sensitive to the repressive effects of the (CGG)n array. As we observe a reduction of transcriptional competence of over 90%, this suggests that the repression mechanism mediated by the (CGG)n repeat sequence is extremely efficient, capable of virtually silencing a promoter linked to (CGG)105. The fact that the HSVtk promoter is highly active compared to the wild type FMR1 promoter in vivo suggests that this repeat induced repressive mechanism would, most likely, result in complete silencing of the less active FMR1 promoter. Clearly, the ancillary factors required to establish
transcriptional repression are not limiting in the stage six oocyte nucleus. A second possibility is the transcriptional repression we observe might mask any transitory activation. This repressive response may be related to the quantity of injected DNA used in this study. Although the injection mass is a typical quantity used, it is the equivalent of a thousand copies of an identical DNA element. This amount of input DNA could induce transgene silencing mechanisms which would mask transient increases in transcript levels, leading to the establishment of a repressive chromatin environment. We do not believe that this type of transgene silencing is occurring for several reasons. We observe no repression of either the co-injected control reporter (CMV-CAT) or with identical amounts of injected pHSVtk-CAT carrying zero or 27 repeats. Previous studies have shown that methylation effects a time dependent repression of the HSVtk promoter by inhibition of transcriptional initiation [45]. If our observations were due to methylation, we might expect that a concomitant effect of this process would be de novo CpG methylation of the injected DNA. This does not appear to occur with our injected
(CGG)n constructs, as assayed by comparison between HpaII/MspI restriction digestions on DNA samples after
microinjection (data not shown). However, we cannot exclude methylation at a small number of perhaps crucial
CpG sites within the HSVtk promoter not detectable by methylation sensitive enzyme cleavage reactions we
performed. We believe that the most likely explanation for the difference between our observations and those of the intrinsic FMR1 promoter lies in the isolation of the (CGG)n array away from its native promoter context. We suggest that the level of transcriptional activity of the FMR1 promoter is determined by a balance between the binding of cis-acting positive transcription factors and the cis-acting repressive effect of the (CGG)n array. Thus, in our experimental system, by isolating the (CGG)n repeat from the normal FMR1 chromosomal milieu, we may have removed regions of the promoter which serve to counteract the establishment of a repressive chromatin environment. The FMR1 promoter contains many such transcription factor binding sites, including Sp1, a-Pal/NRF1, AP2, Myc, Zeste, USF1, USF2 and UBP1 [42,46] whereas the (CGG)n array itself is not essential for transcription [47]. 

