Genetic heterogeneity in response to adenovirus gene therapy
Pierre Lefesvre*, Joline Attema, Angelique Lemckert, Menzo Havenga and Dirk van Bekkum

Abstract
Background: After intravenous delivery of the adenoviral vector into rats or mice, 95–99% of the
encoded protein is produced in the hepatocytes. We observed, as have others, that the early
expression levels of the vector encoded protein vary, greatly, within a species, from one animal
strain to another. This study was initiated to determine the molecular mechanism causing the
difference: hepatic transfection, transcription or translation. For this purpose different doses of
Ad5 luciferase and Ad5 LacZ were intravenously injected into Brown Norway rats and Wag/Rij
rats, two strains that differ by a factor of 10 in encoded protein levels. The proportion of LacZ
positive hepatocytes, the adenoviral DNA, specific transgenic RNA and luciferase protein were
compared in the two strains.
Results: The number of transduced hepatocytes and the amounts of Ad5 DNA in the livers was
similar in both strains, whereas the Brown Norway rats produced 8 to 10 times more of both
vector encoded proteins and of transgene mRNA than the Wag/Rij rats.
Conclusions: It is concluded that the difference between strains in vector encoded protein
expression is due to different transcriptional events. No evidence was obtained to suggest that the
differences are related to liver damage influenced by vector toxicity or immune reactions.
Background
In the course of studies involving intravenous adenoviral gene transfer, we observed a 10 fold difference in plasma levels of the encoded proteins between two of the rat strains employed: the Wag /Rij and the Brown Norway. These differences were observed for several vector encoded proteins as soon as 2 days after gene delivery and were maintained for one month, after which the levels declined slowly to background. Other investigators described differences of the same order of magnitude between mouse strains in expression of transgenes encoding á1-antitrypsin [1], interleukin-12 [2], and human endostatin [3]. These differences in transgene expression between inbred species may have clinical implications, as differences between
inbred strains are considered to reflect differences between individuals of an outbred species. Consequently, the therapeutic efficiency of a transgene could drastically vary from one patient to another. So far, a satisfactory explanation for such strain differences has not been provided. Most authors have attributed the difference
of plasma levels of vector encoded protein to immune reactions against the protein or against the vector
[4,5]. However, the kinetics of the vector encoded proteins in the plasma do not support regulation by an adaptive immune reaction, as the strain difference is manifest as early as 2 days after administration of the vector. Innate humoral immunity, e.g. the presence of neutralising antibodies against the vector can also be excluded as the cause of the difference because such antibodies are not present in na?ve rats. An innate cellular immune reaction directed against the infected liver cells is also an unlikely explanation because plasma transaminase levels [6] – a marker of hepatolysis – though somewhat elevated, are not different in the two strains. The main organ infected by an adenovirus following iv injection is the liver [7,8]. Others and we find that the liver is producing 95–99% of the vector encoded protein after intravenous delivery of recombinant adenoviral vectors. The global process from liver cell infection to protein production is commonly described as adenoviral permissiveness of the liver. In this study we investigated which one of these three processes (transfection, transcription, translation) is pivotal for the strain difference in transgene expression. Secreted vector encoded proteins are not suitable to interpret the early manifestation of transgene expression, as plasma levels are highly dependent on the pharmacokinetic properties of the encoded proteins. Therefore, we employed adenoviral encoded marker genes, the intracellular Luciferase (Luc) and the nuclear â-Galactosidase (LacZ). The luciferase activity of the whole liver is a measure of vector encoded protein expression in that organ while the LacZ staining of hepatocytes provides information on the proportion of liver cells infected. Furthermore, we determined the amount of Ad5 DNA and of transgene mRNA in the liver as measures of the adenoviral infection
of hepatic cells and of transgene transcription respectively.

Results
Intravenous injection of Ad5 vectors in different rat strains results in different levels of early transgene expression

Intravenous administration of a fixed dose of Ad5 vector either expressing the human endostatin gene, or the gene for mhATF-BPTI resulted in clear 10-fold difference in the plasma levels of both proteins between Brown Norway and Wag/Rij rats (Fig. 1 and 2). This difference was detected as soon as 3 days after the vector administration and persisted during the first 6 weeks, subsequently the plasma levels of both proteins slowly decreased to undetectable levels in 2 to 3 months. To investigate whether the livers of the 2 rat strains differ in their permissiveness for Ad5 or if this phenomenon could be explained by differences in the hepatocyte secretion capacity, we administrated Ad5 vector carrying the gene for Luciferase (Ad5 Adapt Luc), a protein that is not secreted. Measurements of Luciferase transgene activity in various organs, following iv administration of the vector, confirmed the observations from other research groups [7,8] that in rodents 95–99% of virus infection and subsequent transgene expression occurs in the liver (Table 1). Next, we determined luciferase activity in the liver of Brown Norway and Wag/Rij rats 2 days after intravenous injection of 109 iu, 3.109 iu, or 1010infectious units (iu) of Ad5 Adapt Luc. The results depicted in the Fig. 3 seem to reflect those observed with ATF-BPTI and endostatin naming a 10-fold difference between Wag/Rij and Brown Norway rats. These experiments with the non-secreted luciferase vector encoded protein confirmed that the two rat strains have a very different liver response to the recombinant adenovirus. Since the levels of mhATF-BPTI and endostatin reached a plateau about 7 days after vector delivery both in the Brown Norway and in the Wag/Rij rats, we also determined the luciferase activity in the liver 7 days post intravenous administration of the Ad5 Adapt Luc. As shown in figure 4, roughly the same values were obtained at the 2 time points, which reflect the kinetics of the plasma concentrations of the secreted proteins ATFBPTI and endostatine.

â-Galactosidase expression in hepatocytes from Brown Norway and Wag/Rij rats
To explore whether differences in the number of transduced hepatocytes could account for the observed differences in transgene expression levels, we injected different doses (109 iu, 3.109 iu and 1010 iu) of Ad5 Adapt LacZ into the tail vein of the rats. Histological inspection of the stained sections allowed an estimation of the proportion of transduced liver cells. Animals were sacrificed after 2 days, liver sections were prepared and stained with X-gal. The liver sections revealed an inhomogeneous distribution of transduced cells. In both rat strains hepatocytes were the sole cell type expressing the â-Galactosidase. Both the number of stained cells and the staining intensity was highest near the interlobular (portal) vein and declined gradually towards the centro lobular area (Fig. 5). The percentage of blue nuclei was roughly proportional to the amount of infectious units administered and did not differ significantly between the two strains (Table 2). However, overall, the intensity of the nuclear LacZ stain was 8 to 9 times higher in the Brown Norway than in Wag/Rij liver sections as determined by computer-assisted analysis of the histological section (Fig. 6). These findings suggest that although the protein production is significantly higher in the Brown Norway rats, the number of infected cells is roughly similar for both rat strains. Still the number of infectious particles per hepatocytes might be higher in the Brown Norway rats. However the number of iu can never be 10 time higher because that would require at least 10 ? the number of hepatocytes (1.8 109) = 1.8 1010, and the dose administered was 1010 iu. 

The number of recombinant adenovirus copies in the liver
Real-time PCR was employed to quantify the copy number of the adenoviral genome in the hepatocytes of
rats from the previously described experiments that  received graded doses of Ad5 Adapt Luc, or of Ad5 Adapt
LacZ. As listed in Table 3, the number of adenoviral copies per liver was similar in the Brown Norway and Wag/Rij rats for both vectors. Roughly, there is a linear relation between the Ad5 DNA detected and the dose of adenoviral vector administered. In the case of LacZ, the deviation from the linearity is not statistically significant. These results shows that recombinant Ad5 infect hepatocytes of both rat strains with similar efficiencies. Thus, the observed differences in levels of vector encoded protein must be due to differences in 
transcription (CMV-promoter activity), RNA stability, RNA translation, or post translational processes.

Liver damage
Considering that the local inflammation of the liver may significantly increase the synthesis of certain proteins, it
could be that the difference in transgene expression observed is a consequence of different inflammatory reactions in the two strains. To eliminate the possibility that he difference found in the Brown Norway rats in encoded protein is due to a global increase in protein synthesis, the total amount of liver protein was determined after different vector doses and time points. It was found to be similar in both strains and not significantly elevated from the basal line (Table 5). Adenovirus particles in apoptotic hepatocytes or phagocytosed
by immune cells would not contribute to the luciferase production. However, to exclude that a massive
hepatitis or a severe inflammatory infiltrate in the liver  is  causing the difference of luciferase expression, the inflammatory infiltration and pathological changes were


Discussion
It has been suggested that, after iv administration, low dose intravenous adenoviral vectors are taken up by
Kupffer cells and degraded quickly within a few hours [1,9] whereas higher doses saturate these cells and the surplus productively transduce hepatocytes. Therefore, we used doses (109 iu – 1010 iu) that are in the linear part of the dose response curve and well above the threshold effect. In both rat strains, 2 days after intravenous delivery of the vector, the â-Galactosidase was observed only in the  hepatocytes. Consequently, it may be concluded that the bulk of the adenoviral genomes in the liver is localized in the hepatocytes.
After correction for the extraction efficiency of DNA, an average of 2.6 109 copies of vector genome were detected in the livers following administration of 1010 iu Ad5 Adapt LacZ. At this dose 75% of the hepatocytes stained positive for â-Galactosidase. It is estimated that the liver of a 350 g rat contains about 1.8 109 hepatocytes [10]. Thus the average number of infectious units per hepatocyte is about 1.5. It is assumed that the infection of hepatocytes by the adenoviruses is a random event following the Poisson distribution. Then, this event will occur at least one time in 75% of the cases when the expected number of occurrences is 1.5. As about 75% of the hepatocytes stained blue following injection of 1010 iu, an hepatocyte will stain blue if it has incorporated one copy of the vector. Poisson probability calculations show also that under these conditions the infection occurs twice in 40% and three times in 20% of the hepatocytes. This variation in the number of adenoviral copies per cell can explain the variation of the staining intensity per cell within one liver, from light to dark blue. In each of the vectors used in this study the transgene was under the control of the CMV immediate early promoter. It was determined, by Norther Blots, that the amount of transgenic mRNA was also different in both rat strains. Thus, the difference in vector encoded protein production found is due to difference in transgene transcription or difference in RNA stability. As expected, a difference in protein levels was observed
following 3 different doses of the vector 109, 3 109 and 1010 iu. However, the lower the dose, the smaller is the
difference of protein expression between the two rat strains. This might be explained by a saturation of the
transgene expression machinery in the Wag / Rij hepatocytes at the higher doses.
