Interactions within the mammalian DNA methyltransferase family
Jean B Margot*1,3, Ann E Ehrenhofer-Murray2 and Heinrich Leonhardt*1,3
Abstract
Background: In mammals, epigenetic information is established and maintained via the
postreplicative methylation of cytosine residues by the DNA methyltransferases Dnmt1, Dnmt3a
and Dnmt3b. Dnmt1 is required for maintenance methylation whereas Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b are
responsible for de novo methylation. Contrary to Dnmt3a or Dnmt3b, the isolated C-terminal
region of Dnmt1 is catalytically inactive, despite the presence of the sequence motifs typical of
active DNA methyltransferases. Deletion analysis has revealed that a large part of the N-terminal
domain is required for enzymatic activity.
Results: The role played by the N-terminal domain in this regulation has been investigated using
the yeast two-hybrid system. We show here the presence of an intra-molecular interaction in
Dnmt1 but not in Dnmt3a or Dnmt3b. This interaction was confirmed by immunoprecipitation and
was localized by deletion mapping. Furthermore, a systematic analysis of interactions among the
Dnmt family members has revealed that DNMT3L interacts with the C-terminal domain of Dnmt3a
and Dnmt3b.
Conclusions: The lack of methylating ability of the isolated C-terminal domain of Dnmt1 could be
explained in part by a physical interaction between N- and C-terminal domains that apparently is
required for activation of the catalytic domain. Our deletion analysis suggests that the tertiary
structure of Dnmt1 is important in this process rather than a particular sequence motif.
Furthermore, the interaction between DNMT3L and the C-terminal domains of Dnmt3a and
Dnmt3b suggests a mechanism whereby the enzymatically inactive DNMT3L brings about the
methylation of its substrate by recruiting an active methylase.
Background
The mechanism of how chromatin architecture is established, maintained and modified is crucial for a thorough
understanding of gene regulation and DNA replication. In higher eukaryotes DNA methylation and histone modifications appear to be the main agents responsible for the formation of active or inactive chromatin. However, what has become clear in the last few years is that the enzymes responsible for these epigenetic modifications do not act independently, but interact with one another. DNA methylation or the transfer of a methyl group to the cytosine of CpG dinucleotides is carried out by DNA methyltransferases (MTases). In eukaryotes, these enzymes are grouped into one family consisting of five members: Dnmt1, Dnmt2, Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b and Dnmt3L [1,2]. Dnmt1 is responsible for the maintenance of DNA methylation after each round of replication [3,4]. Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b are the main players involved in de novo methylation, a type of methylation occurring mainly during early development [5–7]. Dnmt3L shares some homology with Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b and plays a central role in the establishment of maternal genomic imprinting even though it does not have in vitro catalytic activity [7–10]. Finally, no particular function has yet been found for Dnmt2, a protein similar to the prokaryotic MTases. It is unable to methylate DNA in vitro and was shown not to be essential for de novo or maintenance methylation in ES cells even though it carries the key sequence motifs of DNA methyltransferases [11]. The typical eukaryotic (cytosine-5) DNA methyltransferase is a protein about three times larger than its prokaryotic counterpart. Based on functional and structural data it was proposed to result from the fusion between three genes, one of them being an ancestral prokaryotic MTase [12]. By analogy with the prokaryotic enzymes, the C-terminal region has been referred to as the catalytic domain and the N-terminal region as the regulatory domain. Both domains are linked by a short stretch of repeated GlyLys dipeptides. The enzyme exhibits a preference for hemi-methylated substrates [13–15], a property suggested to reside in the C-terminal domain [16]. The Nterminal domain can interact with numerous proteins like DMAP1, PCNA, and Rb [17–19]. It is also multifunctional in that it contains a DNA binding region, a cysteine-rich region, several Zn-binding domains and two regions responsible for the localization to replication foci [20–23]. Surprisingly, the isolated C-terminal domain of Dnmt1 is catalytically inactive despite the presence of the highly conserved sequence motifs typical of active MTases [12,24,25]. Only deletion mutants that retain a substantial part of the N-terminal domain, in addition to the Cterminal domain, are active. Thus, contrary to prokaryotic MTases, the catalytic activity of Dnmt1 has become dependent upon the regulatory domain through evolution. De novo MTases are also organized into a large regulatory N-terminal domain and a smaller catalytic Cterminal domain but, in contrast to Dnmt1, their isolated C-terminus is capable of methylating DNA [26]. The lack of extensive homology between the N-terminal domains of maintenance and de novo MTases points towards a possible
functional difference of this domain. In the first part of this work, we show that the N- and C-terminal domains
of Dnmt1 interact with each other. This interaction, Initially detected by a yeast two-hybrid assay, was confirmed
by immunoprecipitation and mapped by deletion analysis. Dnmt3L is expressed during gametogenesis and was
shown to be essential for maternal genomic imprinting [7]. This gene was placed in the Dnmt3 sub-family due to
its homology to the PHD-like domain of Dnmt3a/3b. So far no catalytic activity has been reported for the enzyme, which is in accordance with its lack of key methyltransferase motifs [10]. We have looked at the possibility that DNMT3L, through its interaction with another MTase, could bring about the methylation of a suitable substrate. A prime candidate is DNMT2, a catalytically inactive protein that nevertheless carries the conserved sequence motifs of active MTases. The potential binding partners of DNMT3L within the MTase family, Dnmt2 and Dnmt1, were tested using the yeast two-hybrid system.

Results
Dnmt1 interactions
A physical interaction between N- and C-terminal domains of Dnmt1 was investigated using the yeast twohybrid
system. When the entire N-terminus was tested with the C-terminal domain, a strong interaction was detected as measured both by the lacZ and the HIS3 reporter assay (Fig. 1B, line 1). This interaction occurred independently of whether the N-terminal domain was used as bait or prey but was lost when N- or C-domains were tested individually, which indicates that the interaction is vector independent and not due to autoactivation. 
Several 5'- and 3'-end deletions of the N- and C-terminal domains were generated to localize more precisely the
region responsible for the interaction. For the N-terminal domain, the results indicated that a surprisingly large
region is necessary since none of the 3'-end deletions showed activation of the reporter genes and only the 5'-
end deletions that removed a comparatively small area (the first 227 amino acids) were positive (Fig. 1B, lines 2–
8). For the C-terminal domain, a deletion of most of a region corresponding to the small domain described in
prokaryotic MTases was also unable to interact with the full-length N-terminal region (Fig. 1B, line 9). Taken
together, these results suggest that the interaction between the N and C-domains depends on their intact globular
folding. The validity of the two-hybrid interaction was checked by immunoprecipitation. The N- and C-terminal domains, engineered with different tags, were expressed either individually or co-expressed in COS-7 cells (Fig. 2, lanes 1–3). As expected from the yeast two-hybrid data, upon immunoprecipitation with á-Flag AB, the Flag-tagged C-terminal domain was pulled down in this assay (Fig. 2, lanes 4, 5). When probed with the anti-Flu AB, the blot revealed the presence of the Flu-tagged N-terminal domain but only when N- and C-domains were co-expressed. This finding clearly shows that the N-terminal domain 

Discussion
In vitro proteolytic cleavage between the N- and Cdomains has been shown to result in a large increase in
the velocity of methylation of unmethylated DNA relative to hemi-methylated DNA [22]. This finding has been
interpreted as the release of the inhibition by the N-terminal domain of the intrinsic de novo activity of the C-terminal domain [22]. This interpretation implies that the Cterminal domain by itself has enzymatic activity. However, this is in disagreement with the lack of catalytic activity reported by several groups for the C-terminal domain alone [12,24,25]. The interaction between N- and Cdomains described here can partly explain this discrepancy as these domains were not physically separated in the proteolytic cleavage experiment. Therefore, the N- and C-domains most likely remained associated accommodating a role of the N-terminal domain in the catalytic process. Lines of evidence for the complex role of the Nterminal region of Dnmt1 in the methylation process include a) deletion mapping of Dnmt1, which indicates that a large part of the N-terminus is required for activity [12,24]; b) fusion of a eukaryotic N-terminus to various prokaryotic (whole) MTases, which changes the preference of the prokaryotic enzyme towards hemi-methylation [27]; and c) the first ~500 amino acids of the Nterminus repress enzymatic activity [16]. What does this interaction mean? Since the C-terminal domain carries
the conserved sequence motifs found in active MTases, this suggests that, at the primary structure level, it is potentially capable of catalysis, but needs somehow to be activated by the N-terminus. The nature of this activation is likely due to a change in the tertiary structure of the protein. Our suggestion of a conformational change is in agreement with the allosteric activation model of Dnmt1, which proposes a double DNA binding site – for unmethylated DNA within the C-terminal and for methylated DNA within the N-terminal domain [16,25,28]. On the other hand, in vitro binding studies using smaller fragments of Dnmt1 revealed that a rather small fragment of about 135 amino acid centered around the cysteine-rich region interacts with the catalytic domain [25]. These results are hard to reconcile with the mapping results described here, which points towards a requirement for rather intact domains. However, since most fragments appear to interact with each other in those in vitro binding assays, it is possible that in vivo the folding of the N-terminal domain prevents some of these interactions. So far, attempts at recovering catalytic activity by mixing in vitro the C-terminal domain with these small N-terminal fragments have been unsuccessful [25], which supports the reported requirement for a mostly intact N-terminal domain in addition to the C-terminal domain for achieving methylation activity [12,24]. Our deletion mapping results point to an intact tertiary structure of the N-terminal domain rather than to a sequence motif as the essential element binding to the C-terminal domain and suggest that the active conformation of the C-terminal domain requires the presence of the correctly folded Nterminal domain for activity.

Interactions within the Dnmt family
The similar organization of Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a/3b led us to examine whether the N-and C-domain interaction of
Dnmt1 also occurs in Dnmt3a or Dnmt3b. However, contrary to Dnmt1, the N-terminal domain of Dnmt3a (NDnmt3a) failed to interact with the corresponding Cdomain – independently of whether the N-terminus was
used as bait or prey (Fig. 3A). The N-terminal domain of Dnmt3b (N-Dnmt3b) also failed to interact with CDnmt3b suggesting an absence of intra-molecular interactions in Dnmt3a or Dnmt3b. Although DNA methyltransferases are known to be found in complexes with methyl-CpG-binding proteins and histone modifying enzymes, little is known about interacting partners within the methyltransferase family itself. For
instance, it is conceivable that Dnmt2 and Dnmt3L,

Figure 2
Co-immunoprecipitation of the N-terminal domain of Dnmt1. COS-7 cells were transfected with Flag-tagged C-terminus (lanes 1, 4), Flag-tagged C-terminus + Flu-tagged N-terminus (lanes 2, 5) or with Flu-tagged N-terminus (lanes 3, 6). The cells were lysed in EBC buffer and the supernatants
immunoprecipitated with á-Flag AB. The complexes were bound to agarose beads, washed and separated by electrophoresis. After transfer to PVDF membranes, the Western blots were probed with á-Flu AB, stripped and reprobed with á-Flag AB. Lanes 1–3 show a ~2% aliquot of the initial extract used in the immunoprecipitation (IP, lanes 4–6). The recovery rate of the immunoprecipitation was about 10 %. 

Discussion
Dnmt3L is expressed during gametogenesis. It is essential for the establishment of maternal genomic imprints as its targeted disruption leads to defective methylation of normally maternally methylated sequences [7]. Our finding that DNMT3L interacts with de novo MTases suggests a mechanism whereby the catalytically inactive Dnmt3L recruits an active MTase. While this work was in progress, Dnmt3L was reported to interact in vitro with Dnmt3a/3b [6]. These authors also showed that Dnmt3L was recruited to heterochromatin foci when co-expressed with Dnmt3a/ 3b whereas it is mainly cytoplasmic when singly expressed in NIH 3T3. They concluded that Dnmt3L might cooperate with Dnmt3a/b to carry out de novo methylation of maternally imprinted genes in oocytes. In spite of well-conserved sequence motifs in their C-terminal domain, Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a/3b share little similarity. For instance, contrary to Dnmt1, the C-terminal domain of Dnmt3a/b is enzymatically active [26]. Also, the cysteine-rich region, which is found in both enzyme sub-families, has different functions. In Dnmt1 this region binds Zn, which is required for allosteric activation [22,25], whereas it acts as transcriptional repressor in Dnmt3a/3b [34]. Phylogenetic analysis also suggests that both enzyme sub-families may have evolved from different prokaryotic ancestors [35,36]. The lack of interaction between N- and C-terminal domains of Dnmt3a/3b is a good indication that the mechanism that regulates methylation for these enzymes is significantly different from that of Dnmt1. This difference is likely due to the preference for hemi-methylated substrates that Dnmt1 has acquired through evolution – a property absent in prokaryotic MTases. A corollary of our results is that a hybrid of N-Dnmt3 with C-Dnmt1 would be inactive, since Dnmt3a/3b are not allosterically regulated [37]. The lack of in vivo interaction between Dnmt1 and MBD2 or MBD3 is in agreement with the in vitro data indicating that human Dnmt1 can be immunoprecipitated only when both MBD2 and MBD3 are present [38]. 

Conclusions
The goal of this study was to investigate the interaction between regulatory and catalytic domains within the
mammalian DNA methyltransferase family. The twohybrid assay has revealed that such an interaction occurs
in Dnmt1, which immediately suggests the possibility of an intra-molecular interaction between both domains.
Immunoprecipitation assays have shown that this interaction can occur in vivo while deletion analysis suggests that this interaction requires an intact tertiary domain structure rather than small and independent binding
motifs. The fact that this interaction appears specific to the maintenance enzyme Dnmt1 could reflect the need to
restrict the catalytic activity of the enzyme to hemi-methylated sites in order to faithfully maintain a given methylation pattern. Another type of interaction has been identified by the two-hybrid assay between the catalytically inactive DNMT3L and the de novo enzymes.

