Screening for sequence-specific RNA-BPs by comprehensive UV crosslinking

Rebecca Hartley1,3, Valerie Le Meuth-Metzinger2,3 and H Beverley Osborne*3

Abstract
Background: Specific cis-elements and the associated trans-acting factors have been implicated in
the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. In the era of genome wide analyses
identifying novel trans-acting factors and cis-regulatory elements is a step towards understanding
coordinated gene expression. UV-crosslink analysis is a standard method used to identify RNAbinding
proteins. Uridine is traditionally used to radiolabel substrate RNAs, however, proteins
binding to cis-elments particularly uridine poor will be weakly or not detected. We evaluate here
the possibility of using UV-crosslinking with RNA substrates radiolabeled with each of the four
ribonucleotides as an approach for screening for novel sequence specific RNA-binding proteins.
Results: The radiolabeled RNA substrates were derived from the 3'UTRs of the cloned Eg and cmos
Xenopus laevis maternal mRNAs. Specific, but not identical, uv-crosslinking signals were
obtained, some of which corresponded to already identified proteins. A signal for a novel 90 kDa
protein was observed with the c-mos 3'UTR radiolabeled with both CTP and GTP but not with
UTP. The binding site of the 90 kDa RNA-binding protein was localised to a 59-nucleotide portion
of the c-mos 3'UTR.
Conclusion: That the 90 kDa signal was detected with RNAs radiolabeled with CTP or GTP but
not UTP illustrates the advantage of radiolabeling all four nucleotides in a UV-crosslink based
screen. This method can be used for both long and short RNAs and does not require knowledge
of the cis-acting sequence. It should be amenable to high throughput screening for RNA binding
proteins.
Background
It is now well documented that gene expression can be regulated post-transcriptionally and a number of RNA sequence elements have been identified that play a role in targeting a mRNA for a particular mode of regulation. For instance, the stability, the translation and the localisation of a mRNA are regulated by cis-elements, many of which are situated in the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR), but such sequence elements are not restricted to the 3'UTR (for review see [1]).  In most cases, regulatory cis-elements are associated with  specific RNA-binding proteins (RNA-BP). Several functional  pairs of cis-element and trans-acting factor have  been identified, for instance the Iron responsive element and the Iron Responsive Protein (reviewed in [2]), the bruno responsive element and bruno [3,4], the Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element (CPE) and the CPE-binding protein [5–7], the Embryo Deadenylation ElemeNt (EDEN) and the EDEN-binding protein [8,9] and lastly, the nanos responsive element and pumilio [10,11]. In at least one instance, the identified cis-element can associate with several factors that confer opposing behaviours: AUrich elements composed of multiple AUUUA motifs can bind both HuR and AUF1. AUF1 binding is correlated with rapid mRNA degradation [12] whereas the mRNA is more stable when HuR binds [13,14]. Sequence specific RNA-BPs are, in general, part of a functional multimeric complex and their primary role in recognising a specific sequence motif could be to anchor the functional complex onto certain mRNAs; anchoring in this context is probably a dynamic process. Accordingly, we hypothesised that identifying the proteins that exhibit binding specificity for a given mRNA or family of similarly regulated mRNAs would be a useful starting point to characterize both novel regulatory cis-acting sequence elements
and the associated multimeric complexes. Within the framework of this hypothesis the experimental approach
used should be independent of a prior knowledge of the cis-element and should be amenable to the simultaneous
analysis of many mRNAs. The identification of regulatory cis-elements is commonly addressed by preparing chimeric genes containing different parts of the mRNA under study and analysing the behaviour of the transcribed RNAs either in vivo or in cell extracts. This approach is not readily applicable to the simultaneous
analysis of many RNAs. For identification of RNA-BPs, several techniques have been recently developed
that allow their direct purification or cloning, including RNA-affinity chromatography [15] and the threehybrid
screen in yeast cells [16]. Again, neither of these methods can be readily used for high-throughput screening.
Both are nominally aimed at identifying proteins that bind to a known sequence element; the three-hybrid
screen can also be used to identify a sequence element bound by a known protein. In the three-hybrid screen, using long RNAs such as those representing the complete 3'UTRs of certain mRNAs would cause technical problems [16]. With the long-term aim of setting up a screening method to identify novel regulatory cis-acting sequence elements and the associated multimeric complexes, we have evaluated the use of uv-crosslinking. This method can be miniaturised and time saving procedures have been described [17] that should allow its application in a high-throughput protocol. In uv-crosslinking a covalent bond is formed by UV irradiation
between the RNA and closely interacting proteins. However, this reaction is relatively inefficient and the formation of a photo-induced product is strongly dependent on structural parameters such as the proximity of reactive amino acids and base. Not all amino acids and bases are equivalent with respect to this photo-induced reaction [18] and references therein). After UV irradiation, the RNA-protein complex is digested by an RNase. This produces a protein with an associated short oligo ribonucleotide that corresponds to the protected RNA fragment. RNAs containing radiolabeled nucleotides are often used in uv-crosslinking experiments. In this case the resulting protein-oligonucleotide product will be radiolabeled only if the oligonucleotide contains a radiolabeled nucleotide. Accordingly the probability of detecting an RNA-BP that binds to a sequence motif rich in a particular base will be increased if this ribonucleotide is radiolabeled. It is important to note that the radiolabeled nucleotide is not necessarily in contact with or covalently linked to the protein. The most commonly used radiolabeled ribonucleotide is uridine. Other ribonucleotides have been used when the sequence element studied was composed exclusively or predominantly of another base. [19,20]). In order to improve the ability of uv-crosslinking to reveal RNA-BPs we have used all four ribonucleotides to radiolabel RNA substrates;
we have called this method "comprehensive uvcrosslinking". We describe here experiments that validate
this approach as a method to screen for novel RNA-BPs even with no prior knowledge of the regulatory element.

Results and Discussion
Comparison of the UV-crosslink patterns obtained with different radiolabeled nucleotides
To evaluate comprehensive uv-crosslinking as a screening method for novel RNA-BPs 32P-labeled UTP, GTP, CTP and ATP were used to radiolabel the RNA substrates corresponding to the 3'UTRs of Eg1, Eg2, Eg5 and c-mos. These RNAs were chosen for an evaluation of the screening method as the pattern of UV-crosslinked proteins obtained with 32P UTP has been described [21]. Also, these RNAs undergo the same post-transcriptional modifications during oocyte maturation and after fertilisation. One would expect therefore that some of the UVcrosslinked proteins would be common to these RNAs. As controls of specificity, similarly labeled RNAs corresponding to the 3'UTRs of the Xenopus laevis mRNAs encoding ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), phosphatase 2A catalytic subunit (PP2Ac), elongation factor 1??(EF1?) and elongaBMC tion factor 1??(EF1?) were also synthesised. The 32P-labeled transcripts were incubated in cytoplasmic extracts made from 4h embryos and processed for UV-crosslink analysis as described in the Materials and Methods. The UV-crosslink patterns obtained with the four radiolabeled nucleotides are shown in Figure 1. For simplicity the radiolabeled
RNA-protein complexes produced by UV-irradiation will be called radiolabeled proteins.
When using 32P-labeled UTP the Eg and c-mos derived RNAs produced a number of radiolabeled proteins (Figure 1A lanes 1–4). We have already shown that these RNAs specifically bind a 53/55 kDa protein (EDEN-BP) [9]. With the exception of the signal produced by this protein, most of the bands were also present in the patterns produced with at least one of the control RNAs (compare lanes 1–4 with 5–8). The molecules containing 32P-ATP yielded patterns with a large number of radiolabeled proteins (Figure 1B). A protein migrating just above the 69 kDa marker was present for all the transcripts tested except EF1?. With the exception of EF1?, all the transcripts terminated by a 65-nt poly( A) tail. Hence this protein may correspond to the 70 kDa embryonic Poly(A) binding protein [20]. Several proteins migrating between the 46 and 53 kDa markers are labeled
in the presence of the Eg1 and Eg2 3'UTR RNAs but not with the PP2Ac or ODC derived RNAs (Figure 2B compare lanes 1 and 2 with 4 and 5). The 32P-GTP labeled Eg and c-mos RNAs produced much simpler crosslink patterns (Figure 1C). The Eg1 and Eg2 derived RNAs labeled with 32P-GTP produced one predominant
band migrating at the position of EDEN-BP (Figure 1C lanes 1 and 2). Three predominant signals (90,60 and 53 kDa) were observed with the c-mos RNA (lane 4), one of which (53 kDa) also migrated at the position of
EDEN-BP. Only faint, non-sequence specific, UVcrosslink patterns were obtained with all the other RNAs
(lanes 3 and 5–7). Interestingly, the Eg5 RNA labeled with 32P-GTP did not produce a signal at the position of EDENBP. When labeled with 32P-CTP, the Eg and c-mos derived RNAs produced two strong signals at 60 and 72 kDa (Figure 1D, lanes 1–4). The 72 kDa protein was also faintly seen with the ODC derived RNA (lane 5). Similar to the GTP-labeled RNA, a 90 kDa protein was also present when the c-mos RNA was labeled with 32P-CTP. Several interesting features are highlighted by a comparison between the patterns obtained with the different 32Plabeled ribonucleotides; assuming that radiolabeled proteins with the same molecular weight are identical. Firstly,  a protein with the binding specificity of EDEN-BP [21] is revealed when UTP and GTP but not by CTP are used to synthesis the RNA. This is coherent with the sequences of the characterised EDEN elements [9,22] that are rich in U/ purine dinucleotides and contain few or no cytidines. A
60 kDa protein is observed with all the RNAs labeled with 32P-UTP or CTP except that derived from ODC mRNA. When using the 32P-GTP labeled transcripts, this protein only becomes radiolabeled in the presence of c-mos RNA. A 72 kDa protein appears to be bound to all of the RNAs. It is detected with the 32P-UTP and CTP labeled molecules but not with the 32P-GTP label. Lastly, binding of a 90 kDa protein detected with 32P-GTP and CTP but not with the 32P UTP, was only observed with the c-mos RNA. This comparison shows that when performing an initial screen for proteins bound to a particular RNA or a family of RNA molecules, using several radiolabeled nucleotides should be particularly informative. In contrast to an analysis using only one radionucleotide, it allows the identification of the full complement of proteins that are susceptible to uv-crosslinking. The 90 kDa protein which shows binding specificity to the c-mos 3'UTR is an example
of a protein that is not detected with the widely used 32P-labeled UTP.
Figure 2
p90 is a sequence specific RNA-binding protein.A Restriction map of c-mos 3'UTR. Numbering is from the stop codon which is indicated by a star (*), EDEN represents the EDEN sequence present in the 3'UTR of c-mos. B and C Mapping of the binding sites of p90 in the c-mos 3'UTR. 32P-CTP (panel B: lanes 2–7) and 32P-GTP (panel B: lanes 8–11 and panel C: lanes 2–7) labeled transcripts, that correspond to different regions of the c-mos 3'UTR, were synthesised and used in UV crosslinking
analyses as described in the legend to Figure 1. The portions of the c-mos 3'UTR cDNA used as template to synthesise the different RNAs is indicated above the lanes. The positions of p90 and EDEN-BP are indicated on the right of the panels and the sizes of the molecular weight markers (lane 1) are indicated on the left.

Localisation of the p90 binding site in c-mos 3'UTR 
The 90 kDa protein detected in the UV-crosslink experiments described above appears to exhibit sequence specific binding as this signal was only observed with the c-mos derived RNA. To confirm specificity we  zmapped the p90 binding site, again using UV crosslinking. The 1.8 kb cDNA corresponding to the c-mos 3'UTR is partitioned in approximately two equal parts by a HindIII restriction site (see Figure 2A). This site was used to subclone the 5' and 3' portions of this cDNA. Templates for in vitro transcription were made by linearizing the resulting plasmids with various restriction enzymes (see Figure 2A). Both 32P-GTP and CTP were used to make in vitro transcripts for UVcrosslink analysis. The Eg1 3'UTR labeled with 32P-CTP was included as a negative control as it does not bind a 90 kDa protein. The data shown in Figure 2B demonstrate that p90 binding,
detected with both radiolabels (lanes 2 and 8), is not observed with the 5' half of the c-mos 3'UTR (lanes 3, 5,
and 9). Binding is observed with the 3' half of the c-mos 3'UTR (lanes 4 and 10) and it is conserved with the 565-
nt portion of the 3' half situated between the central HindIII site and the PvuII site in the cDNA (Figure 2B lane 6). The p90 signal detected with both the 32P-GTP and CTP labeled RNAs appears as a doublet (Figure 2B lanes 2, 4, 6 and 8). Due to this similarity in the form of the signal and the sequence requirements shown by localisation, we assume that the same protein is being detected with the 32PGTP and CTP labeled RNAs. Hence, for finer mapping of the p90 binding site only 32P-GTP was used. Further truncation of the cDNA containing the sequence of the 3' half of c-mos 3'UTR was done using the endogenous restriction sites (Figure 2A). The UV crosslink patterns obtained with the corresponding 32P-GTP labeled RNAs (Figure 2C) localised the p90 binding site to within 153 nt transcribed from the HindIII-AvaI portion of the cDNA (Figure 2C lanes 4–7). RNAs transcribed from the 5' half of the cmos 3'UTR were included as negative controls (lanes 2 and 3).
Finally, a XhoI restriction site was introduced, by site directed mutagenesis, midway between the HindIII and AvaI restriction sites in the c-mos cDNA (Figure 3A). The resulting plasmid was cut by different restriction enzymes to make in vitro transcription templates. The modified RNA corresponding to the HindIII-AvaI portion of the cDNA to c-mos 3'UTR still binds p90 with a distribution of signal between the two bands of the doublet that is identical to that of the wild-type RNA (compare Figure 3B lane 2 with Figure 2B lane 8). Hence, we did not disrupt sequence information needed for p90 binding by inserting the XhoI site into the cDNA. The 131 nt RNA transcribed from templates cut with BsaAI also retained p90 binding (Figure 3B lane 4) but p90 binding was not observed when the RNA only contained sequence upstream of the introduced XhoI site (lanes 3 and 4). Therefore, sequence information (Figure 3C, bold type) between nucleotides 960 (XhoI) and 1019 (BsaAI) of c-mos 3'UTR are required for p90 binding. At present we cannot formally exclude that sequence
information upstream of the introduced XhoI site also affects p90 binding. The potential role of a cis-acting element can sometimes be inferred from knowing in which mRNAs it occurs. Therefore a blast search of the non-redundant 3'UTR database [http://bighost.area.ba.cnr.it] was made using the 59nt region of c-mos 3'UTR containing the p90 binding site. This search did not identify any regions of extended homology (above 25nt) in known 3'UTR sequences. It did identify 7 mRNAs, including c-mos that contained a common eight nucleotide sequence (ATGCAGAG). The Zuker m-fold program [23] [http://bioinfo.math.rpi.edu/ ~mfold] calculated that in the c-mos 3'UTR the last 6-nt of this sequence are presented as a loop on a 5 base pair stem. However this structural presentation is not conserved amongst the other six 3'UTRs.

