A comparison of efficacy and toxicity between electroporation and adenoviral gene transfer
Pierre Lefesvre*, Joline Attema and Dirk van Bekkum
Abstract
Background: Electroporation of skeletal muscle after injection of naked DNA was shown by
others to increase transgene expression. Information regarding tissue damage caused by
electroporation is conflicting. It is also not well known how plasmid electroporation compares with
transfection by adenoviral vectors. To investigate these questions the most used protocol for
muscle electroporation was used, i.e. 8 pulses of 200 V/cm and 20 ms at a frequency of 1 Hz.
Results: Intra-muscular DNA transfer of pLuciferase was increased by 2 logs after electroporation,
confirming data described by others. However, the blood levels of the encoded protein were still
lower than those obtained after injection of first generation adenoviral vectors. Also, the
electroporation procedure, on its own, caused severe muscle damage consisting of rhabdomyolysis
and infiltration, whereas the adenoviral vectors caused only a slight infiltration. As damage of
targeted tissue may be an advantage in the case of tumour transfection, we also compared the two
transfection methods in tumour tissue. In case of poorly permissive tumours, adenoviral vectors
cannot transfect more than 2% of the tumour tissue without inducing significant liver damage. In
contrast, the electroporation seems to offer a wider therapeutic window since it does not cause
any systemic toxicity and still induce's significant transfection.
Conclusions: Plasmid electroporation of the muscle induce severe local damage and is of no
advantage over adenoviral vectors for obtaining high blood levels of a vector encoded protein. In
contrast, electroporation of tumours might be safer than adenoviral gene transfer.
Background
Numerous diseases require treatment by systemic delivery of a therapeutic protein. Repetitive or continuous injections are the only delivery method used in daily practice. As a mean of reducing the inconvenience of multiple injections or implantation of mini pumps, gene transfer technology may offer certain advantages. In order to achieve a high plasma concentration, whatever the vector used, the transfection of a large tissue mass is required (e.g. liver or muscle). In rodents, intravenous injection of a non-targeted vector – viruses or plasmid preparations – induces mainly transfection in the liver and the spleen [1,2]. As of today, transfection of other large organs by viral vectors has not been accomplished in by way of systemic delivery [3]. The main inconveniences of intravenous administration of first generation adenoviral vectors are their immunogenicity [4] and hepatic toxicity [5,6]. The muscle as a large tissue mass is a candidate for  production of recombinant protein, but the transfection is limited to the injection site. Intra muscular administration is an attractive option as it avoids liver damage, but the levels reached are not satisfactory [7]. An alternative to transfection with adenoviral vector is the injection of naked DNA into the muscle followed by electroporation. The electroporation setting that induced high blood levels of excreted encoded proteins were defined by Bettan et al. [8] and Mir et al. [9,10]. This setting of 8 pulses of 20 ms and 200 V/cm at a frequency of 1 Hz increased the plasmid
expression up to 2 logs in the C57Bl/6 mice . In this study, first generation adenovirus transfection and plasmid
electroporation of the muscle were compared to determine which one is the most suitable for obtaining high
plasma levels of two proteins of interest, namely: mhATFBPTI and endostatin. mhATF-BPTI is a newly designed chimeric protein that has angiostatic properties and endostatin is an angiostatic undergoing clinical trials that was used for comparison. As these two proteins are interfering with tissue healing, the luciferase gene was used to study the local tissue damage caused by the two transfection methods. Another application of electroporation is the transfection of tumours. Human as well as rodent tumours vary greatly in expressing the surface receptors for adenovirus. Consequently, the gene transfer with adenoviral vectors is very low in tumours that poorly express those receptors. Plasmid DNA alone is not very efficient transfectant, therefore the electroporation offers a possibility to transfect tumours resistant to viral infection [11,12]. In this study, the
electroporation of a non-permissive adenocarcinoma of the lung is compared to the adenoviral vector.

Results
Electroporation enhances plasmid gene expression in muscle
The luciferase activity in C57Bl/6 mice muscle was compared when transfected with plasmid alone or with plasmid followed by electroporation at various voltage. As depicted on Fig 1 electroporation increased transfection to a maximum of 2 logs which was attained at 180 V/cm. There was no more enhancing effect when the voltage was lowered to 100 V/cm. It remained to be determined if the 2 log increase in transgene expression was enough to obtain high blood levels of a secreted transgenic protein. Therefore, plasmids encoding mhATF-BPTI or human endostatin  were injected into the muscle with and without electroporation and the plasma level of the encoded protein was monitored. To verify that the injection had been properly performed, an equal amount of pAdapt Luc was added to the plasmid preparation and the mixture was injected in a separate group of animals. Both groups (with and without pLuc), showing similar expression levels of the secreted encoded protein were pooled. As shown in Fig 2 the injection of plasmid alone – pATF-BPTI or pEndostatin – did not lead to blood levels above the background. In contrast, plasmid injection followed by electroporation resulted in detectable blood levels of mhATF-BPTI (5 ng / ml) and of hEndostatin (25 ng / ml). These concentrations are however, far below what one can achieve with low dose adenovirus (109iu) injected intravenously which results in protein production by the liver. 

Plasmid electroporation does not compete with adenoviral vectors
The volume of injection limits the quantity of adenovirus or plasmid that can be injected into the gastrocnemius of a mouse without overflow. The maximal volume of 50 ?L and the highest concentrations of the available batches of either recombinant adenovirus (1010iu / 50 ?l) or plasmid (50 ?g / 50 ?l) were employed to compare the two gene transfer methods. The following electroporation conditions i.e. 200 V/cm, 8 pulses of 20 ms at a frequency of 1 Hz, were employed. The luciferase activity was measured in the gastrocnemius muscle of C57BL/6 mice 2 days after the gene delivery. As depicted on figure 3 transgene expression was roughly the same with adenoviral vector as with plasmid electroporation. The leakage of adenovirus out of the muscle induces a significant luciferase activity in the liver and in the spleen. This level corresponds to an intravenous virus dose that is far below that found to be toxic for the liver. In contrast, the electroporation of the muscle was not accompanied by any transgene expression in the liver but a few mice showed a very low luciferase activity
in the spleen. It is noteworthy that the background of luciferase is higher in the muscle than in the liver. This
was always observed and considered to be inherent to the detection method. To further investigate the secretion capacity of the muscle, 1010iu Ad Adapt mhAB were injected in the gastrocnemius of mice. The plasma levels of mhAB, monitored for 3 weeks after the injection, showed a peak at 10 ??4 ng /ml on day 10 after administration. In view of the variation, transduction of the muscle with first generation  Ad 5 is not significantly more efficient that with electroporation.

Local injury caused by muscle electroporation 
The damage induced by the electroporation was assessed by clinical observation, histological examination of muscle sections, and determination of creatine kinase in the plasma. Clinical symptoms were not observed in any of the mice during the observation period of 2 weeks. At autopsy, practiced 2, 7 and 14 days after the electroporation, macroscopic examination of the treated areas showed local abnormalities and an oedema of the whole gastrocnemius muscle. On day 2 the muscles were just a bit pale whereas at day 7 and 14 the site of electroporation was white / creamy and felt hard upon palpation (fig 4). Microscopic examination revealed severe muscle necrosis (fig 5) that was accompanied by a severe polynuclear eosinophilic and mast cell infiltration. The quantification of the pathological changes was assessed by determining the percentage of necrotic fibers on transversal sections of the muscle at the site of electroporation as well as by measuring
the creatine kinase (CK) concentration in the blood. Histological scoring confirmed that the muscle damage
was maximal at 7 days after the electroporation (Fig 6). Since the creatine kinase levels are not decreasing within
the first week after electroporation, the muscle lesions must have continued over several days. In contrast, after
an acute muscle injury like an ischemic infarction, the peak of CK occurs within few hours. This first peak may
have occurred after the electroporation but was not monitored. Thus the elevation of the CK between day 7 and 14,probably reflect the slow necrosis of the muscle fiber occurring during the first week. More importantly, the electric pulse delivery caused on its own a severe rhabdomyolysis and the prior injection of saline significantly
increased the muscle damage, but the addition of naked DNA did not influence the muscle injury.Other investigators showed that protein expression from injected DNA was correlated with the voltage intensity up
to 250 v/cm. Thus, to determine a therapeutic window for the electroporation procedure, the voltage intensity was gradually diminished and the corresponding muscle damage assessed as previously (Fig 7). The degree of necrosis was indeed correlated with the voltage intensity and decreased to background at 50–100 V /cm. 

Unfortunately the luciferase expression levels decreased as fast as the
Figure 1
Enhancement of plasmid expression in muscle by electroporation as a function of voltage. Luciferase expression in gastrocnemius muscle of C57BL/6 mice after injection of 50 ?g pAdapt Luc followed by electroporation (black bars), I njection of 50 ?gpAdapt Luc (striped bar), and injection of saline (white bar). The luciferase activity was determined 2 days after the treatment. The values show the mean of three separate experiments. Data are expressed as means ??SD. BMC Molecular Biology 2002, 3 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/3/12 Blood concentrations achieved by muscle electroporation. Endostatin and mhATF-BPTI plasma levels (red lines) and muscle luciferase activity (black lines) in C57BL/6 mice. The animals were sacrificed 4, 7, and 14 days after treatment to determine the luciferase activity in the injected muscle and plasma levels of endostatin or ATF-BPTI. Five animals per group and data are expressed as means ??SD. A: the mice received 50 ?g pAdapt hEndo +/- 50 ?g pAdapt Luc intramuscularly followed by no electroporation (circles) or by a 200 V/cm pulse delivery (squares). B: the mice received pAdapt mhATF-BPTI +/- 50 ?g pAdapt Luc intramuscularly followed by no electroporation (circles) or by a 200 V/cm pulse delivery (squares). The plasma levels of mhATF-BPTI injected without electroporation were below the detection limit. The injection of two pla smids together did not influence the level of expression of either the luciferase plasmid or that of the plasmid encoding mhATF-BPTI or endostatin. muscle damage, and no therapeutic window could be found with these settings.

Intra-tumoral electroporation as compared to transfection with adenovirus
The permissiveness to adenoviral vectors of rodent as well as of human tumours varies within a range of 3 logs. One of the reasons is that viral vectors are dependant on membrane receptors to enter the cells. Adenoviral transfection can be dramatically impaired in tumours that lack the appropriate receptors. Therefore, transfection of naked DNA using electroporation might offer a possibility to transfect adenoviral-resistant tumours. The L44 bronchial adenocarcinoma was selected from among ten rat tumours of different histological origin, as being very poorly permissive to adenovirus. The standard plasmid electroporation was compared to adenoviral gene delivery in subcutaneously growing tumours. As depicted on fig 8 the electroporation of 50 ?g pAdapt Luc and the injection of 5.109iu Ad Adapt Luc induce roughly similar luciferase expression. However, a non-negligible proportion of adenoviruses leaks out of the tumour and reaches the liver. Such leakage is 600 times higher with intra tumoral delivery than after intra-muscular injection as judged by the luciferase activity measured in the liver. In contrast, there is no leakage of the luciferase activity from the tumour after plasmid electroporation. In order to assess the toxicity associated with the viral leakage to the liver, graded doses of luciferase and empty vectors were injected iv in Brown Norway rats. The intravenous route was chosen on basis of its consistent reproducibility. The luciferase activity in the liver was measured and pathological changes were scored in liver sections. To avoid interference by the transgene, the liver damage were determined in animals injected
with an empty vector. Figure 9 shows that the leakage associated with the intra-tumoral injection of 5.109iu and
1010iu is in the range of vector doses that induce a mild to moderate liver damage. In an attempt to assess the therapeutic window of the adenoviral vector in this poorly permissive tumour, the number of transduced cells in the tumour was determined by injection of vectors encoding the ?-galactosidase gene (Table 1). It is assumed that no significant effect is expected from a therapeutic transgene (e.g thymidin kinase, mhATF-BPTI or endostatin) if the percentage of transduced tumour tissue is below 5%. The intra tumoral injection of 1010iu adenovirus resulted in the transduction of only 1–2% of the tumour cells, mostly limited around the needle track (Table 1). This vector dose of 1010iu is already toxic for the liver (Fig. 9). Thus the margin between efficacy and toxicity of the adenovirus in non-permissive tumour is not wide enough for therapeutic applications.

Figure 3
Adenoviral and electroporation gene transfer into the muscle. Luciferase expression in gastrocnemius muscle, liver and spleen of C57BL/6 mice after intra-muscular injection of 1010iu Ad Adapt Luc (grey bars, n = 5), 50 ?g pAdapt Luc followed by a 200 V/cm electroporation (black bars, n = 6), 1010iu Ad Adapt Empty (gray striped bars, n = 3), and 50 ?g pAdapt empty followed by a 200 V/cm  lectroporation (black striped bars, n = 4). The luciferase activity was determined 2 days after injection. Data are expressed as means ??SD.)

Discussion
Several investigators have used electroporation procedures to increase the gene expression of naked DNA injected in rodents muscles or in tumours [13,14]. There are basically two types of muscle electroporation protocols: (1) high voltage / short pulses and (2) low voltage / long pulses. The highest plasma levels of an encoded protein were obtained with low voltage (200 V /cm) long pulses (20 ms) and 8 pulses at a frequency of 1 Hz, i.e. the blood  concentration of human secreted alkaline phosphatase reached values around 2 ?g / ml [8]. The plasmid preparations described by others are most of the time endotoxin free and the transgene is under a CMV promoter without any nuclear transport signal. Using these settings and the BTX electroporation device, the transgene expression after intra muscular plasmid injection could be enhanced by a factor 100. This led to plasma serum levels of endostatin around 10 – 50 ng /ml. The dose of plasmid per injected
muscle could not be easily increased for technical reasons.
