Accumulation of large non-circular forms of the chromosome in recombination-defective mutants of Escherichia coli
Naofumi Handa1,2 and Ichizo Kobayashi*1
Address: 1Division of Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Shirokanedai, Tokyo 108-8639 Japan and 2Present
address: Sections of Microbiology and of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA
Email: Naofumi Handa - nhanda@ucdavis.edu; Ichizo Kobayashi* - ikobaya@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp
* Corresponding author
Abstract
Background: Double-strand breakage of chromosomal DNA is obviously a serious threat to cells
because various activities of the chromosome depend on its integrity. However, recent
experiments suggest that such breakage may occur frequently during "normal" growth in various
organisms – from bacteria through vertebrates, possibly through arrest of a replication fork at
some endogenous DNA damage.
Results: In order to learn how the recombination processes contribute to generation and
processing of the breakage, large (> 2000 kb) linear forms of Escherichia coli chromosome were
detected by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis in various recombination-defective mutants. The
mutants were analyzed in a rich medium, in which the wild-type strain showed fewer of these huge
broken chromosomes than in a synthetic medium, and the following results were obtained: (i)
Several recB and recC null mutants (in an otherwise rec+ background) accumulated these huge linear
forms, but several non-null recBCD mutants (recD, recC1001, recC1002, recC1003, recC1004,
recC2145, recB2154, and recB2155) did not. (ii) In a recBC sbcA background, in which RecE-mediated
recombination is active, recA, recJ, recQ, recE, recT, recF, recO, and recR mutations led to their
accumulation. The recJ mutant accumulated many linear forms, but this effect was suppressed by a
recQ mutation. (iii) The recA, recJ, recQ, recF and recR mutations led to their accumulation in a recBC
sbcBC background. The recJ mutation showed the largest amount of these forms. (iv) No
accumulation was detected in mutants affecting resolution of Holliday intermediates, recG, ruvAB
and ruvC, in any of these backgrounds.
Conclusion: These results are discussed in terms of stepwise processing of chromosomal doublestrand breaks.
Background
Double-strand (ds) breakage of chromosomal DNA is obviously a serious threat to cells because various activities of the chromosome – gene expression, replication and partition – depend on its integrity. However, recent experiments suggest that such chromosomal ds breakage may occur relatively frequently during "normal" growth in several organisms – in bacteria [1,2], yeast [3] and chicken cells [4]. In Escherichia coli, spontaneous breakage and degradation of the chromosome associated with a replication fork were predicted from early genetic analysis and were detected under various conditions of altered replication (for Published: 28 April 2003
review, see [5]). DNA ds breaks play a key role in homologous recombination. From a DNA ds break, RecBCD enzyme starts degrading DNA (for review, see [6]). When it encounters a specific sequence called Chi, it promotes its pairing with a homologous DNA. Even in the absence of RecBCD enzyme, sbcA mutation confers other recombination pathway, called RecET pathway. The recE gene product  of the Rac prophage converts dsDNA ends into 3' protruding single-stranded form and the recT gene product promotes recombination by annealing them with a homologous DNA in its vicinity (for review, see [7,8]). This recombination may result in one progeny DNA (nonconservative recombination) or two progeny DNAs (conservative double-strand break repair) [9]. In a recBC sbcBC background, a ds end stimulates homologous recombination that results in only one progeny DNA (non-conservative recombination) [10]. Analysis of the stimulation of recombination by replication (for review, see [11]) and analysis of altered chromosomal replication (for review, see [12]) led to the proposal that a chromosomal ds break formed during replication fork arrest triggers homologous recombination, which would reconstitute a replication fork (for review, see [5]). Game and his colleagues have developed a sensitive means of detecting chromosomal ds breakage using a circular chromosome [3]. Under most conditions of pulsedfield gel electrophoresis, a circular yeast chromosome and circular bacterial chromosomes will not enter the gel, very likely because they are trapped by the branches of the network of agarose [3,13,14]. One double-strand break transforms this circular form into a linear form, which can now move slowly in the gel [3]. We used this procedure to detect double-strand breakage of a circular bacterial chromosome occurring spontaneously or after loss of a restriction-modification gene complex [15,16]. We found increased chromosome breakage in recBC-null and recC1002 mutants of E. coli under both conditions [1]. Michel and her colleagues used pulsed-field gel electrophoresis to detect degraded chromosomal DNAs arising spontaneously in recBC mutants and arising during replication fork arrest [2]. RuvABC proteins, which catalyze migration and cleavage of Holliday junctions, are responsible for the occurrence of the degraded DNAs following replication fork arrests [17].
In this work, we employed the pulsed-field gel electrophoresis procedure to measure large non-circular forms of
the chromosome obtained from various recombinationdefective mutants in rec+, recBC sbcA, and recBC sbcBC genetic backgrounds.

Results
Effect of growth medium on the accumulation of large chromosomal fragments
Large linear chromosomal fragments were measured by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. In our analysis, growing
E. coli cells are harvested, embedded in an agarose plug, and lysed in situ. The chromosomes in a plug are electrophoresed in varying electric fields. An example of such a gel is shown in Figure 1. The DNA is partitioned in three places in the gel – the well, the area just below the well (marked by a bar to the right of the gel), and the lower area. Intact circular chromosomes stay in the well [3,14] likely because they are trapped in the branches of agarose resin [13]. Large linear forms generated by a ds break in this circle would escape from agarose trap and form broad bands beneath the well (marked by the bar). This area corresponds to unbranched linear forms DNA of more than 2000 kb when compared with yeast chromosome markers. When the DNAs become smaller by degradation, they will migrate further. These interpretations are based on a previous work with a yeast circular chromosome and on our analysis of E. coli chromosomal breakage after loss of restriction-modification genes [3,15,16]. In this work, we focus on the second DNA species – the huge linear forms in the area just below the well (Figure 1, marked by the bar). In the experiment shown in Figure 1, a rec+ strain (in AB1157 background) grown in minimal medium (M9) (Figure 1, lane 2) gave rise to some of these huge linear DNAs in this area. There was less of this DNA species when the cells were grown in a rich medium (LB) (Figure 1, lanes 3). In an isogenic recB21 recC22 strain, the amount was larger than in rec+. We do not know why the medium makes such a difference. It could reflect properties of the spontaneous DNA damages, the replication fork, the number of replication forks, the number of chromosomes, the organization and structure of the chromosomes, the repair machinery, or the availability of homologous chromosomes for repair. All of these features will influence the chromosome stability not only in rec+, but also in mutants. This medium-dependence is in the opposite direction to what is simply expected from generation of a double-stranded chromosomal end by collapse of a replication fork with another, replication fork moving in the same direction [18], because replication initiation should be more frequent in a rich medium than in a poor medium. Whatever the reason, we chose to use the rich medium in which the rec+ strain produce less linear forms, because the background is clear and may allow sensitive detection of their increase in a survey of various recombination-defective mutants.

rec and ruv mutations
The accumulation of huge linear DNAs was also seen in other recBC null mutants in this AB1157 genetic background (recB21, recC22 and recC73 (Figure 2A)) and in another, V66, genetic background (recC73 (Figure 2B)), as observed earlier [1,2]. A recD mutant showed no accumulation. The other non-null recBCD alleles examined (recC1001, recC1002, recC1003, recC1004, recC2145, recB2154, and recB2155) did not accumulate the huge linears (Figure 2B). We do not know why the same mutant allele, recC73, shows more accumulation in V66 background than in AB1157 background in a reproducible manner (Figures 2A and 2B).
The other mutants tested – recA, recF, recG, recJ, recN, recO, recQ, recR, ruvAB, and ruvC – did not accumulate huge linear DNAs. The recF mutation partially suppressed the effect of the recC73 mutation in accumulating the huge linear chromosomes (Figure 2B). 

recBC sbcA background
In the recBC sbcA strain, an sbcA mutation on the Rac prophage expresses recET genes, which promotes homologous recombination at a ds end [7]. The accumulation of the huge linears was seen with recA, recE, recT, recJ, recQ, recF, recO and recR strains (Figure 2C). Mutations in genes involved in processing Holliday structures – recG, ruvAB and ruvC – did not lead to their accumulation. The accumulation by recJ mutation was suppressed by a recQ mutation (Figure 2C, lanes 7 and 15).

recBC sbcBC background
In the recBC sbcBC strain, RecBCD enzyme is inactive and RecFOR and RecQJ proteins promote recombination together with RecA [19]. In the recBC sbcBC background, recA, recF, recJ, recQ and recR mutants accumulated these huge linears to varying extents (Figure 2D). However, again the ruvC mutation did not lead to accumulation.

Control experiments
These assays were carried out more than twice for each strain, and the extent of accumulation of the linear forms
was reproducible. The DNA in the area just below the origin was also measured by densitometry to confirm the
above results (data not shown). When the chromosomal DNA in the agar plug was digested with a restriction enzyme (XbaI) before the pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, all the strains examined produced comparable amounts of DNA (Figure 3). This amount is much larger than the large linear forms. This indicates that the total amount of undegraded DNA associated with the cells is comparable for all the strains.

Discussion
We found that large, non-circular forms of the chromosome accumulate in varying amounts in various recombination-defective mutants of Escherichia coli. Our operational definition of the non-circular forms is
their presence in an area just below the well in our pulsedfield gel, as marked by a bar in Figure 1. The molecular
species in this area may not be limited to a simple linear form of varying lengths. If a chromosome carries multiple replication forks as usual at 37°C in rich media, more than one double-strand break may be necessary to form a non-circular, branched species, which should be able to move through the gel. Finding out macroscopic forms of these giant molecules would be a technical challenge (see [20], for example). We do not know why DNAs make two broad bands in this area (Figure 1, 4th lane, for example), either. Depending on the electrophoresis condition, one narrow band, a pair of two bands or one very broad band was observed (data not shown).

Conclusions

Our sensitive measurements of the large non-circular forms of the chromosome – which should be able to detect
one ds break out of 4 million bp – provided unique sets of data that would help in further elucidating the mechanisms of chromosome double-strand break repair. A simplest interpretation of our data is that RecBCD enzyme is involved in repair and degradation of broken chromosomes, and that RecA, RecFOR, RecQJ and RecET functions are involved in prevention and/or repair of the breakage. Interaction was observed between a recC mutation and a recF mutation and between a recQ mutation and a recJ mutation. ruvABC mutants and a recG mutant did not accumulate broken chromosomes. Further molecular analysis would bring about interpretation of the present data in detailed molecular terms.

Methods
Bacteria
Escherichia coli K-12 strains used are listed in Table 1.
Media
E. coli cells were grown in M9 medium (1 ? M9 salts [34], 0.2% glucose, 0.05 mM CaCl2, 0.5 mM MgSO4, 0.2% casamino acids and 1 microgram/ml vitamin B1) and LB broth (1.0% Bacto-tryptone, 0.5% Yeast extract and 1.0% NaCl) with antibiotics at the following concentrations when necessary: ampicillin (Amp) at 50 microgram/ml together with methicillin at 200 microgram/ml, chloramphenicol (Cml) at 25 microgram/ml, kanamycin (Kan) at 10 microgram/ml and tetracycline (Tet) at 10 microgram/ ml.

