Control of dinucleoside polyphosphates by the FHIT-homologous HNT2 gene, adenine biosynthesis and heat shock in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Marta Rubio-Texeira1,2, James M Varnum1, Pawel Bieganowski1 and
Charles Brenner*1

Abstract
Background: The FHIT gene is lost early in the development of many tumors. Fhit possesses
intrinsic ApppA hydrolase activity though ApppA cleavage is not required for tumor suppression.
Because a mutant form of Fhit that is functional in tumor suppression and defective in catalysis binds
ApppA well, it was hypothesized that Fhit-substrate complexes are the active, signaling form of Fhit.
Which substrates are most important for Fhit signaling remain unknown.
Results: Here we demonstrate that dinucleoside polyphosphate levels increase 500-fold to
hundreds of micromolar in strains devoid of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae homolog of Fhit, Hnt2.
Accumulation of dinucleoside polyphosphates is reversed by re-expression of Hnt2 and is active
site-dependent. Dinucleoside polyphosphate levels depend on an intact adenine biosynthetic
pathway and time in liquid culture, and are induced by heat shock to greater than 0.1 millimolar
even in Hnt2+ cells.
Conclusions: The data indicate that Hnt2 hydrolyzes both ApppN and AppppN in vivo and that,
in heat-shocked, adenine prototrophic yeast strains, dinucleoside polyphosphates accumulate to
levels in which they may saturate Hnt2.
Background
The human FHIT gene, located at the chromosome 3 fragile site FRA3B, is inactivated early in the development of many tumors [1]. Murine Fhit is also located at a fragile site [2,3] and mice heterozygous for disruption of Fhit, given low intragastric doses of the mutagen N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine, develop stomach and sebaceous
tumors [4] that can be prevented by viral Fhit expression [5]. Fhit, a dimer of 147 amino acid subunits, is a member of the histidine triad (HIT) superfamily of nucleotide hydrolases and transferases [6,7]. Members of the Hint branch of the HIT superfamily are found in all forms of life [8]. The S. cerevisiae Hint homolog, Hnt1, and rabbit Hint possess adenosine monophosphoramidase activity that functions in yeast to positively regulate function of Kin28, Ccl1 and Tfb3, which constitute the kinase component of general transcription factor TFIIH [9]. A new Hint related protein, Aprataxin, is mutated in individuals with ataxia with oculomotor apraxia [10,11] and has a yeast homolog termed Hnt3 [9]. Members of the Fhit branch of the HIT superfamily have been found in fungi [12,13], animals [2,14,15] and plants [7] and hydrolyze diadenosine tetraphosphate, diadenosine triphosphate and other 5'- 5"'-dinucleoside polyphosphates. The middle histidine of the histidine triad (His96 in human Fhit), which is critical for hydrolysis of ApppA by Fhit [14,16], is not necessary for tumor suppression [17,18]. Nonetheless, wild-type and His96Asn forms of Fhit are saturated by ApppA in the low micromolar range and form stable complexes with non-hydrolyzable ApppA in which two ApppA analogs are bound per Fhit dimer and all phosphates cluster on one surface of the protein [16]. These observations suggested
that Fhit-substrate complexes may be the active, signaling form of Fhit and that the function of the catalytically
essential histidine may be to terminate the lifetime of signaling complexes [16]. Given that neither transcriptional nor post-transcriptional regulation has been reported for Fhit protein, the level of biological activity of Fhit may be controlled by levels of Fhit substrates, inhibitors, and proteins that interact with Fhit-nucleotide complexes. Fhit proteins from humans [19] and worms [15] bind ApppA and AppppA with Km values of 2 to 3 ?M. Human Fhit [14] and the S. cerevisiae Fhit homolog [13], which was called Aph1 but is here termed Hnt2 under nomenclature aproved by the Saccharomyces Genome Database, cleave ApppA more readily while Aph1, the S. pombe homolog, cleaves AppppA more readily [20]. Consistent with the ApppA hydrolase activity of purified Fhit protein, most cancer cell lines that are Fhit negative at the protein level have higher levels of ApppA
than cell lines that are Fhit positive [21]. Nonetheless, the actual concentrations of dinucleoside polyphosphates
were submicromolar in every cell culture sample [21] and thus, under the reported culture conditions, the measured dinucleoside polyphosphates would not be expected to occupy the Fhit active site substantially [19]. Dinucleoside polyphosphate levels were measured in adenine-requiring S. cerevisiae strains before or after disruption of the Fhithomologous HNT2 gene [13] and in adenine-requiring S. pombe strains as a function of disruption and overexpression of the Fhit-homologous aph1 gene [22]. Recently, it was observed that diadenosine polyphosphates undergo a divalent cation-dependent conformational change that might mediate their biosynthesis, catabolism or signalling properties [23]. Here we discover a requirement of adenine biosynthesis
for high-level dinucleoside polyphosphate accumulation in the absence of the Fhit homolog in S. cerevisiae. By constructing active site mutants of Hnt2 that were expressed in yeast, we demonstrate that ApppN and, to a lesser degree, AppppN levels are controlled by the Hnt2 active site. An added benefit of these constructions is the availability of yeast strains that possess high levels of dinucleoside polyphosphates and at the same time express a mutant Fhit-homologous protein, because these are conditions which have been postulated to constitute the signalling form of Fhit [16]. Finally, using controlled genotypes we revisited conditions that lead to increased accumulation of dinucleoside polyphosphates [24–33]. Recognizing that hnt2 deletion is a pathological condition, we were particular interested in identifying conditions that lead to accumulation of such compounds in cells that contain a functional HNT2 gene, rather than simply identifying conditions that produce diadenosine polyphosphate accumulation in the absence of Hnt2. While cells without a functional HNT2 gene accumulate dinucleoside polyphosphates in excess of 10 ?M in a variety of nonstressed and stressed conditions, 46?C heat shock was the only condition that produced dinucleoside polyphosphate accumulation in excess of 10 ?M in cells containing a functional HNT2 gene. These conditions did not render the cells conditionally null for Hnt2 because cells expressing HNT2 continued to limit dinucleoside polyphosphate accumulation during hours of heat shock, though at levels of ~0.1 mM. Recently, discovery that the Hint-homologous HNT1 gene is required for high temperature growth on galactose and observations that alleles of cak1, kin28, ccl1 and tfb3are hypersensitive to loss of Hnt1 enzyme activity provided evidence that Hnt1 enzyme activity positively regulates
Kin28 function, particularly on galactose media [9]. Though phenotypic consequences of hnt2 mutations have
yet to be discovered, our observations suggest that synthetic lethal interactions with hnt2 mutations are likely to
be found in adenine prototrophic strains undergoing heat shock.

Results and discussion
Disruption of HNT2 and tetrad analysis of dinucleoside polyphosphate levels
An earlier report demonstrated that disruption of HNT2 was tolerated by haploid yeast strains without an effect on growth and that ApppN and AppppN accumulate 30 and 3-fold, respectively on account of the hnt2 deletion [13]. Because those data were obtained by random spore analysis, we considered it important to test whether elevated dinucleoside polyphosphate levels co-segregate with hnt2 disruption in all tetrads examined and whether any other commonly used genetic markers affect dinucleoside polyphosphate levels. Diploid strain BY71 (Table 1), created to be heterozygous for MAT, ADE2, HIS3, LEU2, LYS2, MET15, TRP1, URA3 and HNT2, was allowed to sporulate and was then dissected. As shown in Figure 1,  tetrads produced four viable colonies, two of which were large and white, and two of which were smaller and pink on YPD medium, which scored as ade- on SDC -ade medium. Markers segregated 2:2 in nearly all cases and possession of a 1976 bp PCR fragment using primers 4726 and 4722 always correlated with geneticin-resistance while possession of a 1200 bp product correlated with geneticin-sensitivity, as expected for segregants containing a nondisrupted HNT2 gene.
Haploid segregants from three complete tetrads were cultured for 24, 48 and 72 hours in SDC medium, lysed, and levels of ApppN and AppppN were determined. As shown in Table 2, strains containing an intact HNT2 gene were never observed to have calculated intracellular ApppN levels above 3 ?M and typically were found to have ApppN levels below 1 ?M. Strains disrupted for hnt2 had ApppN levels of approximately 6 to 43 ?M after one day of culture, rising to approximately 30 to 300 ?M and 50 to 350 ?M after two and three days of culture, respectively. The ade2 mutation was partially epistatic to the effect of hnt2 disruption on ApppN accumulation. hnt2 ??strains containing ade2 mutations were several fold lower in ApppN accumulation than hnt2 ?ADE2 isolates. Thus, deletion of hnt2 afforded a 48-fold increase in ApppN in ade2 mutants, consistent with an earlier report of a 31-fold effect [13], but a 211-fold increase in ADE2 strains. Earlier, hnt2 deletion was reported to increase AppppN levels only 2.5-fold but the study was performed in ade2 mutants [13]. Consistent with that report, the three hnt2 ade2 strains showed only a 2-fold higher AppppN level than the three HNT2 ade2 strains, when nucleotide levels were averaged across the three time points. In contrast, hnt2 ?ADE2 strains achieved a 3.7-fold higher level of AppppN than HNT2 ADE2 strains. Larger increases in AppppN concentrations have been seen with disruption of Apa1 and Apa2, the diadenosine tetraphosphate phosphorylases in S. cerevisiae[34,35], indicating that they have a more significant role in controlling AppppN levels than does Hnt2. In the case of disruption of the Fhit and Hnt2-homologous aph1 gene in S. pombe, which encodes an enzyme relatively specific for a AppppA [20], a 290-fold increase in AppppA concentration was observed [22]. Our data indicate that Hnt2 hydrolyzes ApppN and AppppN in vivo in budding yeast and that an intact adenine biosynthetic pathway is required for high-level synthesis and accumulation of adenylylated dinucleoside polyphosphates.

Hnt2 active site-dependence of dinucleoside polyphosphate accumulation
Catalytic activity of the Fhit ApppA hydrolase depends on His96 [14,16]. To test whether the active site of Hnt2 is necessary to control dinucleoside polyphosphate accumulation in vivo, wild-type and mutant alleles of HNT2 that differ at His109, corresponding to human Fhit His96, were expressed from the HNT2 promoter on plasmids (Table 3) in hnt2 ?ADE2 strain BY71-6c. As shown in Table 4, reintroduction of wild-type HNT2 produced a 40 to 125- fold reduction in intracellular concentrations of ApppN and a two to seven-fold reduction in levels of AppppN. This reduction was active-site dependent: adding back multicopy HNT2 with the nucleophilic histidine replaced by alanine or aspartate reduced dinucleoside polyphosphate levels less than two-fold.

Dinucleoside polyphosphate levels may not be limited by the levels of lysyl tRNA synthetase
AppppA is induced by heat shock in bacteria [36] and the induction of AppppA was thought to be a function of the heat-shock inducible LysU lysyl tRNA synthetase. However, deletion of lysU had no effect on heat-shock inducible AppppA accumulation [37]. The KRS1 gene [38] encoding cytosolic lysyl tRNA synthetase was cloned into multicopy plasmid pRS423 [39] to generate plasmid pM1. Strains BY71-16d (ADE2 HNT2) and BY71-6c (ADE2 hnt2) were transformed with pM1 and the pRS423 control plasmid, and cultures were harvested at 24, 48 and 72 hours. Determination of ApppN and AppppN concentrations revealed t hat ApppN levels are substantially higher in hnt2 mutants than in isogenic wild-types at all time points and that plasmids conferring multiple copies of KRS1 did not increase ApppN or AppppN levels at any culture time point (Table 5). To address whether plasmid pM1 indeed increased lysyl tRNA synthetase activity, lysates from pRS423 and pM1-transformed BY71-6c were assayed for incorporation of 3H lysine into yeast tRNA. As shown in Figure 2, tRNA-dependent lysine incorporation was increased 2.1-fold by expression of KRS1 from a multicopy plasmid.

Heat shock is the most effective stress for elevation of dinucleoside polyphosphates
In the wild and in the laboratory, yeast are exposed to stresses such as hypo-osmotic or hyperosmotic conditions,
toxic cations, heat shock and cell-cycle disruptive reagents. To test whether such conditions induce
dinucleoside polyphosphates in hnt2- or Hnt2+ cells, we incubated ADE2 hnt2 and ADE2 HNT2 cells in water, 1 M sorbitol, 2 mM CdCl2, 46 ?C heat shock, 10 mM caffeine, or in rich media for two hours and determined dinucleoside polyphosphate levels. Additionally, to test whether moderate overexpression of the lysyl tRNA synthetase gene affected accumulation, we compared control transformants to multicopy KRS1 transformants of the two strains. As shown in Table 6, the hnt2 samples had substantially higher ApppN levels than HNT2 samples under all conditions. Among the hnt2 samples, only heat shocked samples showed evidence of ApppN levels higher than the levels in nonstressed hnt2 cells. Similarly, among the HNT2 samples, the heat shocked samples showed increased ApppN levels compared with control-treated cells while CdCl2 and other treated samples showed no significant changes. KRS1 on a multicopy plasmid showed no significant alteration of ApppN levels in any sample. As with other experiments, AppppN levels were lower than ApppN levels in all cases. Heat shock was the best inducer 

Figure 1 Disruption of hnt2. Strain BY16 was crossed with strain BY4717 to generate diploid strain BY71, which was dissected to generate haploid progeny. Markers were scored for mating type, auxotrophic requirements and G418-resistance. The two small segregants per tetrad are ade2 ??mutants. Here, four segregants that had been scored for G418-resistance were scored for size of the HNT2 locus by PCR using diagnostic primers 4722 and 4726. G418-sensitive progeny, BY71-3a and BY71-3c produced a product of 1200 bp while G418-resistant progeny BY71-3b and BY71-3d produced a product of 1976 bp, demonstrating physical linkage of kanMX2 to hnt2 disruption.
of AppppN. Hypotonic, hypertonic and caffeine treated media produced no increase in AppppN (not shown).
To further investigate the kinetics of heat shock and cadmium-induction of ApppN and AppppN levels, we transformed hnt2 ?ADE2 strain BY71-6c with multicopy plasmids containing no HNT2 gene, the wild-type HNT2 gene, or the HNT2-His109Ala or HNT2-His109Asp alleles of HNT2. Cultures were exposed to either 2 mM CdCl2 or 46?C heat shock and intracellular concentrations of ApppN and AppppN were determined at 30-minute timepoints. As shown in Figure 3, ApppN and AppppN levels are higher in hnt2 strains than in cells with a functional HNT2 gene, and were not significantly elevated by 2 mM CdCl2. However, when cells were heat shocked, as shown in Figure 4, ApppN and AppppN levels increased substantially in cultures with every HNT2 genotype (absence, presence or active site mutation). Increases in dinucleoside polyphosphates in Hnt2+ cultures cannot be attributed to thermal inactivation of Hnt2 because the presence of HNT2 plasmids continues to reduce incremental increases in dinucleoside polyphosphates even in the fourth hour of the heat shock. Furthermore, the active-site mutant alleles of HNT2, HNT2-His109Ala and HNT2-His109Asp, provided on plasmids pB32 and pB86, demonstrated intermediate abilities to control dinucleoside polyphosphate levels, suggesting that elevated temperature reduces the catalytic defects of these mutant enzymes. The high levels of ApppN (~100 ?M) and AppppN (~10 ?M) and the fact that Hnt2-containing samples continue to reduce the rate of increase in dinucleoside polyphosphates without reducing their concentrations demonstrate that heat shock induces dinucleoside polyphosphate synthesis and that Hnt2 is saturated under such conditions. 
