Lambda Red-mediated recombinogenic engineering of
enterohemorrhagic and enteropathogenic E. coli
Kenan C Murphy* and Kenneth G Campellone
Abstract
Background: The ë Red recombineering technology has been used extensively in Escherichia coli
and Salmonella typhimurium for easy PCR-mediated generation of deletion mutants, but less so in
pathogenic species of E. coli such as EHEC and EPEC. Our early experiments with the use of ë Red
in EHEC and EPEC have led to sporadic results, leading to the present study to identify factors that
might improve the efficiency of Red recombineering in these pathogenic strains of E. coli.
Results: In this report, we have identified conditions that optimize the use of ë Red for
recombineering in EHEC and EPEC. Using plasmids that contain a Ptac-red-gam operon and a
temperature-sensitive origin of replication, we have generated multiple mutations (both marked
and unmarked) in known virulence genes. In addition, we have easily deleted five O157-specific
islands (O-islands) of EHEC suspected of containing virulence factors. We have examined the use
of both PCR-generated substrates (40 bp of flanking homology) and plasmid-derived substrates (~1
kb of flanking homology); both work well and each have their own advantages. The establishment
of the hyper-rec phenotype requires only a 20 minute IPTG induction period of red and gam. This
recombinogenic window is important as constitutive expression of red and gam induces a 10-fold
increase in spontaneous resistance to rifampicin. Other factors such as the orientation of the drug
marker in recombination substrates and heat shock effects also play roles in the success of Redmediated
recombination in EHEC and EPEC.
Conclusions: The ë Red recombineering technology has been optimized for use in pathogenic
species of E. coli, namely EHEC and EPEC. As demonstration of this technology, five O-islands of
EHEC were easily and precisely deleted from the chromosome by electroporation with PCRgenerated
substrates containing drug markers flanked with 40 bp of target DNA. These results
should encourage the use of ë Red recombineering in these and other strains of pathogenic bacteria
for faster identification of virulence factors and the speedy generation of bacterial mutants for
vaccine development.
Background
A new method for engineering bacterial chromosomes has emerged in recent years that takes advantage of the
high proficiency of bacteriophage recombination systems acting on linear DNA substrates [see reference [1] for
review]. The ë Red recombination system, consisting of Bet (a ssDNA annealing protein) and Exo (a 5'-3' dsDNA exonuclease) promotes gene replacement of electroporated linear DNA substrates into the Escherichia
coli K-12 chromosome at a very high efficiency [2-5]. Inactivation of host RecBCD exonuclease activity, either by mutation or production of the anti-RecBCD Gam function, is required for efficient Red-promoted recombination with linear dsDNA substrates [2]. Zhang and coworkers [6], using the E. coli rac prophage RecET recombination system, recognized that PCR-generated substrates with as little as 40 bp of homology could serve as efficient substrates for gene replacement in E. coli. The use of such substrates has also been demonstrated with the ë Red system, with Red and Gam being supplied from either a prophage [4], a low-copy number plasmid [5], or from a ?recBCD::Ptac-gam-red chromosomal substitution [unpublished observations]. The high efficiency of Red and RecET-promoted recombination with such short regions of homology has allowed E. coli geneticists to perform oligo-directed gene replacements that yeast geneticists have performed for years [7-9].
The establishment of a hyper-recombinogenic phenotype in E. coli K-12 by expression of plasmid-encoded Red and Gam in vivo suggested that the system might easily be adapted for use in other bacterial strains. In fact, many
labs have reported the use of ë Red for making PCR-generated gene knock-outs in Salmonella enterica Serovar
typhimurium [10-16] and Salmonella enterica Serovar enteritidis [17]. ë Red has also been used for epitope tagging of chromosomal genes in Salmonella enterica [18]. Day and co-workers have used ë Red for generating a dsbD::ery substitution in Shigella flexneri [19]. Recently, Derbise et al [20] have used Red to promote gene replacement in Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, though the efficiency with PCR substrates containing short regions of homology was successful for only one out of three loci tested. Pathogenic E. coli species should also be amenable to the use of ë Red for chromosomal engineering. Enterohemorrhagic E. coli O157:H7 (EHEC) and enteropathogenic E coli (EPEC) are members of the attaching and effacing (AE) family of enteric pathogens [21,22]. These pathogens bind tightly to the intestinal epithelium and cause localized effacement of micovilli, followed by alteration of the cytoskeleton beneath sites of bacterial attachment. Some labs have used ë Red to promote gene knockouts in EPEC by recombination between linear plasmid DNA fragments containing long regions of homology (~0.5 – 1 kb) and the EPEC chromosome [23-25]. In addition, a few reports have utilized PCR substrates containing short regions of homology to perform gene replacement in EHEC [26-28], the latter report employing plasmids and protocols described herein. None of these reports, however, described the frequency of recombinant formation or the reproducibility of Red-promoted PCR-mediated recombination
in EHEC at multiple loci. Indeed, our initial attempts to employ ë Red for PCR-mediated gene replacement
at various loci in EHEC in EPEC were met with sporadic success, similar to the limited success seen with Redpromoted short homology recombination in Y. pseudotuberculosis. These difficulties prompted us to examine more closely the methodologies of ë Red promoted PCR-mediated gene replacement, especially in regard to optimizing its use in EHEC and EPEC. In this report, we have found conditions that allowed us
to reproducibly obtain PCR-mediated recombinants using ë Red recombination in EHEC and EPEC, guidelines that might also apply to the use of Red in other pathogenic bacteria. These steps include the use of an optimal buffer for the preparation of electrocompetent cells, a heat-shock step that induces higher frequencies of gene replacement, and proper positioning of the drug marker within the recombinant PCR substrate. As demonstration of the utility of this technology, five EHEC O-islands were easily deleted from the EHEC chromosome by simple electroporation with PCR-generated substrates. We also have noted the importance of limiting expression of Red functions during growth of EHEC, as extended expression of the recombination functions induces a 10-fold increase in spontaneous mutagenesis. Finally, we report gene replacement frequencies generated by various treatments of plasmid substrates to construct marked and precise deletions of EHEC eae, tir, and the eae-cesT-tir operon. 

Results
ë Red for PCR-mediated gene replacement in EHEC 
Red-promoted gene replacement using PCR derived substrates is diagrammed in Figure 1. Typically, PCR is performed with two primers (60 mers) which contain 20 bases at the 3' ends to amplify a drug marker. In addition, the primers contain 40 bases at the 5' ends that are complimentary to either the upstream or downstream regions of the target gene (see Figure 1). The PCR product, which has the drug marker flanked by 40 bases upstream and downstream of the targeted gene of interest, is simply electroporated into Red + Gam producing E. coli or Salmonella. This strategy has been shown to promote high efficiency gene replacement with such substrates in E. coli K-12 [4,5], as well as Salmonella species (see Background). We have previously shown that a Red + Gam-producing plasmid (pTP223) promotes gene replacement efficiently with substrates containing long regions of homology to the target gene [2,3]. On the other hand, PCR substrates containing short regions of homology (40–60 bp) recombine at very low frequency when Red and Gam are supplied by multi-copy plasmid pTP223 [reference [5]; unpublished observations]. We and others have noted that expression of red from the chromosome (or low copy number plasmids) is better suited for Red-promoted recombination [2,4,5]. It is assumed that since Red induces the rolling circle mode of replication in medium or high copy number plasmids [29], linear multimers of the plasmid are generated that may compete with the electroporated substrates for the Red recombination functions. This reasoning explains why pTP223, while expressing high levels of Red and Gam, is not optimal for Red-promoted gene replacement in E. coli K-12. In addition, studies in our lab with ?recBCD::gam-red chromosomal substitutions (i.e., no resident plasmid), expressing red from either Plac or the stronger Ptac promoter, have shown that Red-promoted recombination with shorthomology substrates requires higher level expression of the red functions relative to long-homology substrates [unpublished observations]. This observation explains why pTP223 works well with long homology substrates, but not well with short homology substrates: the limited amount of "free" Red functions when expressed from pTP223 is adequate for long homology substrates, but not for PCR (short homology) substrates. A construct that meets both these requirements (high expression from a single or low copy number replisome) is plasmid pKD46, described by Datsenko and Wanner [5] which uses the pBAD promoter to express red and gam from a low copy number temperature-sensitive replicon. A similar plasmid was constructed in our lab, except that gam and red are driven by the Ptac promoter (pKM201). A variation of pKM201 was constructed which expresses the lacI repressor gene (pKM208) in order to keep expression of red and gam under tight control prior to IPTG induction.
In anticipation of the requirement to easily remove these plasmids after gene replacement, both plasmids
contain temperature-sensitive origins of replication. EHEC containing pTP223, pKM201, or pKM208 were
electroporated with a PCR substrate containing the kan gene flanked by 40 bases from the 5' and 3' regions of the
lacZ gene, using an optimized protocol scheme for preparation of electrocompetence cells as described in the
Methods section. Recombinants were detected as white KanR colonies on LB-kan plates containing X-gal and
IPTG, as previously described [2]. As expected, plasmid pTP223 was unable to efficiently promote short-homology recombination in EHEC (data not shown; however, see results with EPEC below). On the contrary, low copy number plasmids pKM201 and pKM208 were able to promote short homology recombination in EHEC at the lacZ locus. Cells harboring LacI-expressing pKM208 required prior induction with IPTG for efficient recombination (see below); cells containing pKM201 did not require IPTG addition (due to Ptac leakiness in the absence of overexpressed LacI). In five separate experiments, Red expression from pKM208 produced gene replacements at a rate between 70–600 recombinants per 108 cell survivor (total number of recombinants varied from 750–3000). From one of these experiments, ten out of ten white KanR transformants tested positive for gene replacement by PCR analysis (data not shown). In addition, a PCR fragment containing a lacZ deletion with a cat insertion worked as well as the one described above using kan. It is noteworthy, however, that while the ?lacZ::kan allele yielded recombinants at a frequency of 0.7–6 ? 10-6 per survivor in EHEC containing pKM208, the same PCR fragment in E. coli K-12 containing pKM208 yielded recombinants at a frequency of 10-4 per survivor (data not shown). The sequences used in targeting ?lacZ to the E. coli K-12 and EHEC chromosomes are identical. The reason for this lower frequency is not known, but may be due to lower expression of red and gam in EHEC, an EHEC-specific restriction system(s), or lower rates of DNA uptake following electroporation.
One other possibility for the reduction in efficiency of Red + Gam-promoted PCR-mediated gene replacement in
EHEC relative to that seen in E. coli K-12 is that the ë Gam

Drug marker context dependency affects the efficiency of gene replacement
EHEC strains containing the kan substitutions shown in Table 1 were further purified by streaking on LB plates
containing 40 µg/ml kanamycin. Interestingly, kan substituted islands #12, #77 and #169, while selected on LB
plates containing kanamycin at 20 µg/ml, did not grow at this higher kanamycin concentration (but did restreak
well at 20 µg/ml). The other two substitutions (?island #103::kan and ?islands #130–131::kan), which consistently gave higher frequencies of gene replacement relative to the others, grew well on LB containing 40 µg/ml kanamycin. These results suggest that the position and/or orientation of the drug cassette within the chromosome alters its expression levels. Thus, the low frequency of Oisland #169 replacement (see Table 1) might be due to the influence of neighboring transcripts reading into the kan gene following integration of the ?island 169::kan PCR substrate into the chromosome, or instability of the kan transcript due to sequences fused to its 3' end. To test this hypothesis, deletion of O-island #169 was repeated using a PCR product that reversed the direction of kan transcription within this chromosomal region. This PCR product was generated with primers ?island169E & ?island169F; see Table 6 (Additional file #2). In three separate experiments, we found (on average) 10-fold higher KanR transformants when kan was reading leftward from the position of O-island #169 (according to the numbering in the sequence file) instead of rightward. This leftward reading direction of the kan gene places it colinear with other genes in this region (ytfB and Z5814) and supports the notion that proper positioning of the drug marker in the chromosome can influence the recovery of the recombinant.

Extended expression of Red and Gam is mutagenic
Unlike E. coli K-12 and Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium, there are no phage transductional protocols for EHEC to place ë Red-generated deletion alleles into clean genetic backgrounds. Thus, it was important to consider the possible mutagenic profile of ë Red expression in EHEC. Somewhat surprisingly, overnight cultures of EHEC containing uncontrolled expression of red and gam from pKM201 (which does not express lacI) showed a 10- fold increase in the rate of spontaneous rifampicin resistance (Figure 2). EHEC containing pKM208 (which expresses the lacI repressor as well as the Ptac-red-gam operon) showed a significant increase in rifampicin resistance only when incubated in the presence of IPTG overnight. In order to determine the minimum time of Red induction required to generate the hyper-rec phenotype, we measured the frequency of gene replacement as a function of IPTG induction. Figure 3 shows that a 20 minute exposure to IPTG is sufficient to induce the hyper-rec phenotype in EHEC. For most of the experiments reported above, we used a 1 hour IPTG induction period. Thus, we examined if Red induction for 1 hour induced a mutagenic phenotype in EHEC. EHEC cells containing pKM208 were exposed to IPTG for 1 hour in a manner identical that used for the preparation of electrocompetent cells, and plated on LB plates containing rifampicin. No increase in RifR cells was seen in such preparations when compared to uninduced cultures (see Figure 3, insert). Thus, while uncontrolled expression of red and gam causes a 10-fold increase in mutagenesis, limited expression of red and gam required for establishment of the hyper-rec phenotype is not mutagenic, at least with regard to the generation of rifampicin resistant mutants.

