Loss of cellular adhesion to matrix induces p53-independent expression of PTEN tumor suppressor
Ray-Chang Wu1,2, Martina Blumenthal1, Xinwei Li1 and
Axel H Sch?nthal*1,3
Keywords: Tumor Suppressor, PTEN, Anchorage-dependence, p53, Adhesion
Abstract
Background: The tumor suppressor gene PTEN has been found mutated in many types of
advanced tumors. When introduced into tumor cells that lack the wild-type allele of the gene,
exogenous PTEN was able to suppress their ability to grow anchorage-independently, and thus
reverted one of the typical characteristics of tumor cells. As these findings indicated that PTEN
might be involved in the regulation of anchorage-dependent cell growth, we analyzed this aspect of
PTEN function in non-tumor cells with an anchorage-dependent phenotype.
Results: We found that in response to the disruption of cell-matrix interactions, expression of
endogenous PTEN was transcriptionally activated, and elevated levels of PTEN protein and activity
were present in the cells. These events correlated with decreased phosphorylation of focal
adhesion kinase, and occurred even in the absence of p53, a tumor suppressor protein and recently
established stimulator of PTEN transcription.
Conclusions: In view of PTEN's potent growth-inhibitory capacity, we conclude that its induction
after cell-matrix disruptions contributes to the maintenance of the anchorage-dependent
phenotype of normal cells.
Background
The tumor suppressor gene PTEN (also called MMAC1) has been found deleted or mutated in a great variety of human tumors and tumor cell lines [1–3], and its tumor suppressing function has been confirmed in several in vitro studies [4–10]. Mice which are homozygously deficient in wild-type PTEN die during embryonic development and harbor regions of increased cellular proliferation, whereas heterozygous mice are viable but spontaneously develop tumors of various origins [11,12]. PTEN has been shown to exhibit dual specificity protein phosphatase activity, as well as lipid phosphatase activity in vitro[13–18]. These enzymatic functions appear to be involved in the regulation of at least two separate signal transduction pathways. First, PTEN's protein phosphatase  activity is able to down-regulate focal adhesion kinase (FAK) phosphorylation, which leads to the inactivation of the Ras/MAP kinase pathway [19–21]. Second, its lipid phosphatase activity targets the second messenger phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate [PtdIns(3,4,5)P3]  and thereby blocks activation of the protein kinase B (PKB/Akt) pathway [11,18,22–24]. Whereas both of the above pathways are intimately involved in the control of cell growth and survival, PTEN-regulated FAK activity further appears to impinge on cell adhesion, cell migration, and cell invasion [20,21]. It therefore emerges that the loss of PTEN activity may confer increased survival ability, proliferative potential, and invasive capacity on cells, and thereby may promote progression towards a more malignant phenotype. A characteristic phenotype of tumorigenic cells is their
ability to grow anchorage-independently in suspendsion culture, or embedded in soft agar, without the need for attachment to the surface of a cell culture dish [25,26]. A flurry of papers has established a close link between anchorageindependent growth and the activity of several components of the cell cycle machinery, such as various
cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), and the CDK inhibitors p21Cip1 and p27Kip1[27–32]. There are indications that PTEN may be involved in these processes as well. For example, mouse embryonal stem (ES) cells with homozygous deletion of the PTEN gene exhibit increased anchorage-independent growth as compared to normal ES cells [12]. Similarly, transfer of a wild type PTEN gene into anchorage-independent human glioblastoma cells (which lack functional PTEN), results in their greatly reduced ability to form colonies in soft agar [4–6]. The interpretation of these latter findings, however, is complicated by the strong anti-proliferative effects of PTEN even in monolayer culture, which is consistently observed when the wild type version of this gene is introduced into PTEN-negative tumor cells [4,6–10,18,33]. Moreover, in human glioma and breast cancer cell lines, the ectopic expression of wild type PTEN leads to anoikis, which is apoptosis initiated by the disruption of cell matrix-interactions [23,34–36]. Because essentially all of these previous studies have analyzed
PTEN function by introducing the cloned version of the gene back into PTEN-deficient cells, essentially nothing
is known about the regulation of the endogenous PTEN gene in response to alterations of cell-matrix interactions.
For example, it is unclear whether PTEN is constitutively active or becomes activated in response to
changes in the cellular microenvironment. Here, we present our findings that in normal anchorage-dependent
fibroblast cells, the expression and activity of endogenous PTEN is increased when cellular adhesion to matrix is disrupted. In parallel, phosphorylation of FAK, a known target of PTEN, is greatly reduced. In view of PTEN's potent growth-inhibitory capacity, we conclude from our study that the increased expression and activity of endogenous PTEN in response to the disruption of cell-matrix interactions contributes to the maintenance of the anchorage-dependent phenotype of normal cells. 

Results
A model to study cell regulatory events during anchorageindependent growth is the culture of cells in suspension,
i.e. on HEMA-coated plates that prevent cells from attachment to the matrix of the cell culture dish [37]. Several
studies have employed this approach and characterized the regulation of various cell cycle-regulatory proteins after the transfer of cells to such suspension culture [27–32]. Here, we have used this model to analyze the potential involvement of the tumor suppressor PTEN.

Figure 1
PTEN protein levels in suspension culture cells MDAH or 10T1/2 cells were transferred to suspension culture conditions for the times indicated. Total cellular lysate was prepared and analyzed by Western blot with PTEN specific antibodies. In addition, different cell cycle-regulatory proteins were analyzed in parallel as indicated. The top panel shows lysates from 10T1/2 cells, whereas MDAH cells are represented in the bottom panels. The murine cell line 10T1/2 and the human cell line MDAH, both of which are anchorage-dependent fibroblasts, were detached from their tissue culture dishes and cultured further on HEMA-coated plates. As shown in Figure 1, this transfer to suspension culture resulted in elevated
expression of PTEN protein in each cell line. This increase was apparent within the first four hours and continued
for several more hours. In parallel, the expression of cyclin A, an essential component of certain cyclin-dependent kinases and absolutely required for the progression of cells through the cell cycle [38,39], was downregulated under these conditions (Figure 1), consistent with earlier observations [27,28,31]. Furthermore, expression of the CDK inhibitor p27Kip1 was strongly increased in suspension cells (Figure 1), similar to what has been observed in other cell types after the disruption of cell-matrix interactions [29,31,32]. Finally, as we have reported before [31], the expression of cdk4, one of the catalytic subunits of CDKs, was not significantly altered in suspension culture cells and therefore could be used as a loading control for the Western blot analysis. As expected in the case of anchorage-dependent cells, the activity of cyclindependent kinases was strongly reduced and cell proliferation was inhibited under these suspension culture conditions (not shown).
To analyze whether the observed induction of PTEN protein was due to elevated expression of its mRNA, Northern blot analysis was performed. In this case, increased expression was found as well (Figure 2). In MDAH cells in particular, the increase in PTEN mRNA closely correlated with the observed increase in PTEN protein and encompassed both major mRNA species of 2.5 and 5.0 kb. In the mouse cells, only the shorter mRNA species appeared to  be induced. In order to determine the relative increase in PTEN mRNA levels, the Northern blots were stripped and re-hybridized with control probes for ?-actin and choA, the latter a highly abundant mRNA of unknown function [40]. We consistently found that the amount of ?-actin mRNA was somewhat reduced during suspension culture, whereas the amount of choA remained relatively stable. We therefore used choA as the loading control and calculated the increase in PTEN mRNA with reference to choA. Using this approach, we determined that PTEN mRNA

Figure 2
PTEN mRNA levels in suspension culture cells MDAH or 10T1/2 cells were transferred to suspension culture conditions for the times indicated. Poly A+ RNA was harvested and subjected to Northern blot analysis. To detect PTEN mRNA, a radioactively labeled PTEN cDNA fragment was used. To control for the amounts of mRNA loaded in each lane, the filters were stripped and rehybridized to a probe for ?-actin, as well as a probe for choA. was increased up to 5-fold in MDAH cells and 4-fold in
10T1/2 cells. This induction was comparable to the increase observed in Western blot analysis and therefore indicated that the levels of PTEN protein were elevated due to the increased expression of PTEN mRNA. Although clearly induced in both cell lines, the kinetics of PTEN induction in 10T1/2 and MDAH cells were somewhat different at later time points; i.e., there was a slight reduction of PTEN mRNA and protein in MDAH cells at 36 hours, possibly indicating some cell type-specific differences. By using nuclear run-off analysis, we further determined that the induction of PTEN was regulated at the transcriptional level, i.e. the transcription of the PTEN gene was significantly higher in cells that were transferred to suspension culture conditions (Figure 3).
We next analyzed whether the elevated quantity of PTEN protein would indeed be reflected in increased phosphatase activity in suspension culture cells. In order to establish whether PTEN protein phosphatase activity could be reliably measured in vitro, we first transfected PTENnegative U87 cells with an expression vector harbouring PTEN cDNA. As a control, the cells were also transfected with empty vector. Then, PTEN was immunoprecipitated from the respective cellular lysates and the antigen-antibody complex was analyzed for protein phosphatase activity. As shown in Figure 4A, only cells transfected with PTEN cDNA exhibited significant enzymatic activity. Non-transfected U87 cells, or cells transfected with vector alone, did not exhibit protein phosphatase activity above background levels. After having established that PTEN protein phosphatase
activity could be determined specifically, we transferred MDAH cells to suspension culture conditions and measured PTEN activity at various times afterwards. As shown in Figure 4B, there was an increase in PTEN activity that could be detected as early as four hours after detachment and reached its maximum at around 12 hours. It is noticeable that the activity at the onset of the experiment (0  hours, cells attached to tissue culture plates) was higher than background, which likely indicates some basal activity of PTEN in attached cells. This basal level activity was not detectable in PTEN-negative U87 cells (compare Figure 4A).
Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a known substrate for PTEN and has been shown to be dephosphorylated by this
phosphatase in vitro and in vivo [20,21,34]. We therefore determined whether the increased PTEN phosphatase activity would correlate with decreased phosphorylation of FAK in our cells. This was indeed the case. As shown in Figure 5, the detachment of MDAH cells from their matrix resulted in decreased tyrosine-specific phosphorylation of FAK. The overall amount of FAK protein in these cells did not change under these conditions, indicating that the loss of tyrosine phosphorylation was not caused by reduced amounts of protein.
In light of a recent report establishing the tumor suppressor p53 as a transcriptional activator of PTEN expression
[41], we investigated whether this protein would affect the observed induction of PTEN in our cell system. As MDAH cells themselves are p53-negative, we used MDAH cells stably transfected with a tetracycline-regulated p53 gene, called TR9-7 [42]. These TR9-7 cells were pre-treated with or without tetracycline in monolayer culture. After the induction of p53 was maximal, the cells were transferred to suspension culture conditions and analyzed for their expression of PTEN. As shown in Figure 6, the degree of PTEN induction was essentially the same in the absence or  presence of p53, indicating that p53 did not affect the induction of PTEN protein under these conditions. In parallel, MDAH cells were also treated with tetracycline and transferred to suspension culture. In this case as well, tetracycline treatment had no effect on the induction of PTEN, confirming that tetracycline by itself did not affect PTEN expression (Figure 6). In conclusion, MDAH cells (p53-negative), 10T1/2 cells (p53-positive), and TR9-7 cells (high or low levels of p53) all exhibited similarly in-

Figure 3
PTEN mRNA transcription in suspension culture cells MDAH cells were transferred to suspension culture conditions for 12 hours. To analyze the transcription of the PTEN gene, nuclei were harvested and nuclear run-off analysis was performed essentially as described [64]. As a control, the radiolabeled RNA was also hybridized to a DNA sequence representing the choA gene, as well as to non-gene-specific sequences from the plasmid pBluescript (pBs). creased expression levels of PTEN in response to the disruption of cell-matrix interactions. Therefore, we conclude that the observed induction of PTEN occurs independent of p53.

Discussion
In light of the close correlation between the anchorage-independent phenotype and the tumorigenicity of transformed cells, it is important to fully understand the cellular mechanisms that are involved in cell growth arrest after the disruption of cell-matrix interactions. Many previous studies in this area have focused on the contribution of various components of the cell cycle machinery. Collectively, they have established that the expression of cyclin A and cyclin D, in combination with the activity of the cyclin- dependent kinase inhibitors p21Cip1 and p27Kip1, is a crucial determinant of anchorage-dependent cell growth culture [27–32]. However, while the above elements clearly are essential executioners of cell cycle progression, it is conceivable that other elements, directly or indirectly, might be involved in anchorage-dependent growth control as well. In this regard, a report from our laboratory has indicated a role for the serine/threonine specific protein phosphatase type 2A (PP2A) [43].  In this current study, we investigated the response of the PTEN tumor suppressor to changes in cell-matrix interactions of anchorage-dependent human and mouse fibroblast cells. Previous studies by others had shown that the ectopic expression of PTEN in anchorage-independent tumor cells greatly reduced their ability to grow in soft agar [4–6]. In this latter situation, however, the forced expression of ectopic PTEN effectively impairs cellular proliferation in general, even under two-dimensional culture conditions where the cells are attached to substratum 
