Mutations in the Lactococcus lactis Ll.LtrB group II intron that retain mobility in vivo
Lisa M D'Souza*1,2 and Jin Zhong1
Abstract
Background: Group II introns are mobile genetic elements that form conserved secondary and
tertiary structures. In order to determine which of the conserved structural elements are required
for mobility, a series of domain and sub-domain deletions were made in the Lactococcus lactis group
II intron (Ll.LtrB) and tested for mobility in a genetic assay. Point mutations in domains V and VI
were also tested.
Results: The largest deletion that could be made without severely compromising mobility was 158
nucleotides in DIVb(1–2). This mutant had a mobility frequency comparable to the wild-type Ll.LtrB
intron (?ORF construct). Hence, all subsequent mutations were done in this mutant background.
Deletion of DIIb reduced mobility to approximately 18% of wild-type, while another deletion in
domain II (nts 404–459) was mobile to a minor extent. Only two deletions in DI and none in DIII
were tolerated. Some mobility was also observed for a DIVa deletion mutant. Of the three point
mutants at position G3 in DV, only G3A retained mobility. In DVI, deletion of the branch-point
nucleotide abolished mobility, but the presence of any nucleotide at the branch-point position
restored mobility to some extent.
Conclusions: The smallest intron capable of efficient retrohoming was 725 nucleotides,
comprising the DIVb(1–2) and DII(ii)a,b deletions. The tertiary elements found to be nonessential
for mobility were alpha, kappa and eta. In DV, only the G3A mutant was mobile. A branch-point
residue is required for intron mobility.
Background
Group II introns are catalytic RNAs that are also mobile genetic elements. Although their primary sequences vary considerably, the intron RNAs fold into well-conserved structures (Figure 1). The generalized group II intron secondary structure consists of six helical domains emerging from a central wheel [1,2]. Some group II introns are capable of self-splicing; however for efficient splicing in vivo, the intron-encoded ORF or host-encoded splicing factors are required [3]. Mobile group II introns encode a reverse transcriptase/maturase, with the coding region generally located in domain IV. Group II introns were first identified in fungal mitochondria
and grouped on the basis of their secondary structures [2,4,5]. They have been found in organelle genomes of

Figure 1
Secondary structure model of the Ll.LtrB group II intron. The model is based on the general structure described for group IIA introns in Toor et al., 2001 [13]. The bottom structure depicts the entire intron, while the one at the top is a detailed representation of DIV. Domains are indicated by Roman numerals I-VI and sub-domain structures are denoted by letters and numbers. EBS and IBS interacting elements are marked and tertiary interactions are represented by Greek letters. ç, ç' and æ elements are marked with dotted lines because of uncertainty in their prediction. The point mutations and deletions (whose boundaries are defined by brackets) are shown in gray. fungi and plants and also in a number of bacteria [6]. None have been found in animals, although it has been suggested that group II introns may be progenitors of nuclear spliceosomal introns based on similarities between nuclear pre-mRNA splicing in eukaryotes and the splicing mechanism used by group II introns [7,8]. In the first step of splicing, there is a nucleophilic attack by the branch-point residue on the nucleotide at position 1 of the intron, resulting in a lariat structure with the intron remaining attached to the 3' exon. The second transesterification results in exon ligation with the release of lariat RNA complexed with the intron-encoded protein. This ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex is an endonuclease, which can initiate reverse splicing into an intron-less target site in a process known as retrohoming [3]. After the intron RNA reverse splices into one strand of the doublestranded
DNA, the intron-encoded protein cleaves the other strand at position +9 or +10 downstream of the intron
insertion site, and the generated 3' end of the second strand is used as a primer for reverse transcription of the
inserted intron RNA. Integration of the resultant cDNA occurs via the host's recombination or repair mechanisms. At this point, however, it is not clear what the exact structural requirements for retrohoming are, or which tertiary interactions are dispensable for the reaction. This mutational study is an effort to understand what structural features of the intron RNA are important for mobility and to utilize that information to construct a minimal intron capable of retrohoming. The development of a core functional intron would be interesting not only from an evolutionary perspective, but would also facilitate manipulation in the laboratory.

Results and Discussion
Domain I
Domain I possesses numerous intra- and inter-domain interactions by which it serves as a scaffold for intron folding. It associates with domain V to form the catalytic core. It is also important for recognition of the 5' exon in cis splicing reactions and for targeting DNA or RNA in reverse splicing [9]. Not surprisingly, deletions in sub-domain structures, particularly Ic, greatly diminish mobility. In this report, the ratio of ampRtetR to ampR colonies of each mutant, normalized to the wild-type ratio, was used as a measure of mobility frequency. It is important to note that for mutants with a very low mobility (? 0.001%), this ratio may not reflect mobility frequency due to background tetR colonies and it was necessary to verify intron insertion by PCR analysis.
Only two deletions in domain I retained some mobility; domain Ib, 0.06%, and the ê helix (nts 190–204), 0.37%.
The Ib deletion mutant had a mobility frequency of 0.06%, which may indicate that the á tertiary element is
not absolutely essential for mobility. This result is interesting in that only the á deletion mutant is mobile, while
both the á' deletion and the á-á' double deletion are not. This is in contrast to the results of splicing assays with the group IIB introns aI5ã and Pl.LSU/2, where it has been shown that the á-á' interaction is essential for splicing [10–12]. This discrepancy could reflect the fact that the mobility assay is more sensitive and can detect greatly diminished levels of splicing and mobility. It is also possible that other structural features of Ll.LtrB or its interaction with LtrA protein help it properly orient important regions flanking the á element.
Based on an earlier secondary structure of the Id(i-iii) region, the ê helix included positions 190–204 (Figure 2a).
A deletion of this sub-domain resulted in a frequency of 0.37%. However, when the structure was redrawn based
on comparative analysis (Figure 2b) [13], and the new helix containing the ê interacting element was deleted (nts
185–201), the frequency dropped over 1000-fold. These results imply that the ê-ê' interaction itself may not be essential for the activity of the intron, but the overall structure of this region is critical. This is further indicated by the deletion of the helix just above it (nts 205–210,339– 346), for which no mobility was detected. The finding that ê-ê' is not essential is similar to a finding by Costa et al., 2000 for the Pl.LSU/2 intron in which a deletion of the entire ID(ii)a stem loop containing the ê element was still capable of splicing [12]. Additionally, this element is absent from the introns S.p.cox2I1, P.a.cox1I4, A.m.cox1I3 and P.a.cox1I1, along with Id(ii)1 [13]. The loss of the interaction might also be compensated for by the intron-encoded protein. This is supported by a strong protein enhanced crosslink between U191 (near ê in domain I) and C2421 (near ê' in domain V) (Noah and Lambowitz, unpublished data). None of the other 11 sub-domain deletions in domain I
were mobile. Even the double deletion mutants á-á' and â-â', which presumably affect local folding and hence
could be less deleterious overall, did not restore mobility. The observed homing frequencies in the range of 10-3 –
10-4%, are close to the background level of appearance of tetR colonies (~10-3 %).
Surprisingly, neither the single nor the double deletions involved in the â-â' interaction are mobile. This interaction is not well conserved and is missing from some introns classified into the following structural categories: bacterial classes B (B2-like intron structure), C (novel hybrid) and D (unusual B-like) [13]. However, this region may be involved in protein interactions, based on strong protein protections observed in this region [14]. Strong protein protections are also observed in the Id4 terminal purine-rich loop. In fact it is these two sites in DI, which exhibit the strongest LtrA protections [14]. 

Domain II
From the mobility analysis it is clear that deletions in subdomains IIa and IIb are mobile to some extent, while a
complete deletion of domain II is not functional. 100% of the colonies picked from both deletions were true homing events (10/10). This is consistent with previous reports where Bachl and Schmelzer (1990) [15] showed that a partial truncation of DII leaving a short hairpin in the intron bI1, had no pronounced effect on splicing efficiency, whereas a complete deletion eliminated the reaction. This was also demonstrated in aI5ã [16]. The II(ii)a,b deletion of nucleotides 404–459 was mobile to a small extent, (frequency 0.23%). This region includes the ç interacting element, indicating that it may not be essential for mobility. The ç-ç' interaction has been primarily observed to mediate a conformational change between the two steps of splicing [17]. It is also missing from some mitochondrial class A1 and bacterial classes B, C and D intron structural groups, which may indicate that it is not absolutely essential for splicing.

Domain III
Many reports indicate that domain III is absolutely required for splicing in vivo and in vitro. Although its exact
function is unknown, it has been speculated to be involved in the formation of the catalytic core [9]. Besides
this, it was shown for the group IIB intron aI5ã that the phylogenetically conserved basal stem loop contains one
of the most internalized regions of the molecule [11]. Here it was found that neither deletion in domain III
could be tolerated. Frequencies were at the background level in both cases (<10-3 to 10-4 %) and no bona fide
homing events were found. 
Domain IV

Domain IV is the most variable domain and has not been shown to have a large effect on either splicing or mobility. In fact the mobility frequency of the DIVb(1–2) deletion is almost 70% of the wild-type intron, which is the highest mobility observed for any deletion in this report. In this case, 10/10 colonies tested were true homing events.

Surprisingly the deletion of DIVa (which is the primary binding site for LtrA) exhibited a low level of mobility (6 ? 10-4%), although the number of true homing events was only 60 – 80%. This is likely due to residual binding whereby LtrA recognizes other features of the intron to promote splicing and mobility [[14,18], Cui and Lambowitz, in preparation].

Domain V
It had previously been reported that the invariant G at position 2 of the catalytic AGC triad in domain V was critical for self splicing in vitro and in vivo. Here, point mutants of this residue were made. Although the mobility frequency (3 ? 10-3 – 0.25%) was greatly diminished, G3A was the least affected presumably reflecting a requirement for a purine and/or base pair at that position, whereas G3C and G3U had frequencies almost 100-fold lower. Interestingly,  it was observed upon sequencing the isolated homing products, that G3C and G3U were revertants back to G, the wild-type nucleotide. By contrast, the G3A colonies were verified to involve integraton of the G3A intron. For the G3C and G3U revertants, the donor plasmids from these tetR colonies were also isolated and sequenced to verify that they had the original mutations. In a mutational analysis of the same triad in the aI5ã intron, it was found that mutations at G3 were some of the more deleterious ones in DV [19]. Revertants that restored base pairing were also identified. Further, the G3U mutant could not be rescued but the G3A mutant could, suggesting  that a purine is required at this position, as seen in Ll.LtrB.

Domain VI

A deletion mutant of the branch-point A (?A54), along with the other three substitution mutants A54G, A54C
and A54U were tested. Interestingly, the ?A54 mutant gave a frequency of 0.003%, but upon sequencing the
homing products, no true ?A54 mutation was found. Instead, a variety of sequence changes surrounding the
branch-point A were observed in the homing products, although the original deletion mutation remained the same in the donor plasmids (Figure 3). It appears that this mutation can be rescued by many kinds of secondary mutations as indicated. It was reported that group II introns could go through a hydrolytic splicing pathway to generate a linear intron even without a bulged nucleotide [20]. Our findings suggest that if a linear intron is generated by hydrolytic splicing of ?A54, it is unable to carry out mobility. Hence, the branch-point nucleotide is absolutely required for mobility. Recently, the crystal structure of a 70 nucleotide RNA containing domains V and VI of the aI5ã intron was determined [21]. Surprisingly, it revealed 2 bulged nucleotide residues in DVI instead of one. In aI5ã it is the branchpoint A and the following 3' nucleotide which is a U, that
are both bulged out. This appears inconsistent with the revertant sequences here, which show selection for a
Watson-Crick base pair at the position 3' but not 5' to the branch-point nucleotide. Support for the observations in this report comes from work by Chu et al., 2001 [22] on the aI5ã intron, in which they propose that a 4 bp stem 3' of the branch-point is one of the determinants for branch-point activation. Additionally, they state that a G:U wobble pair above the branch-point is also a determinant, which fits in with the observation that a non-canonical pair (A:A or A:C) is found at this position in some of the revertants. More recent support for this upstream weak or non pairing with simultaneous downstream pairing, was observed in all lariat forming group II introns in barley chloroplasts [23]. Here 13/16 introns lacked Watson-Crick pairing above the branch-point A and G:C was the downstream base pair whenever there was an upstream A:C, A:G or G:G. Additionally, no barley intron was found, in which the upstream Watson-Crick pair coincided with a downstream G:U or other weak pair.
All three branch-point substitution mutants tested were mobile to differing extents with relatively high  frequencies (0.67 – 2.02%), indicating that any base at the branch-point position can function in mobility. 100% of  these products were true homing events. Although it is specifically the N6 amino group of the
branch-point A that is recognized, many lines of evidence suggest that the actual base at the branch site is not required to be an A. Naturally occurring introns have U (11 times), followed by G (5 occurrences) and C (1 occurrence) (Comparative RNA Web Site database: http:// www.rna.icmb.utexas.edu/). In aI5ã, G and U at the
branch-point were found to allow for some branching to occur [22]. Also, it was observed that even if the branchpoint residue was paired, it did not have a large effect on splicing efficiency and no effect on the choice of the branch site [20]. C was also found in the branch-point position in 8/25  ?A54 homing products. From previous reports it was noted that if the branch-point nucleotide was changed to a C, branching was reduced [20,22].

