Phage annealing proteins promote oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis in Escherichia coli and mouse ES cells
Youming Zhang1,2, Joep PP Muyrers1,2, Jeanette Rientjes1,2 and A
Francis Stewart*1,3
Abstract
Background: The phage protein pairs, RecE/RecT from Rac or Redá/Redâ from ë, initiate
efficient double strand break repair (DSBR) in Escherichia coli that has proven very useful for DNA
engineering. These phage pairs initiate DSBR either by annealing or by another mechanism that is
not defined.
Results: Here we report that these proteins also mediate single strand oligonucleotide repair
(ssOR) at high efficiencies. The ssOR activity, unlike DSBR, does not require a phage exonuclease
(RecE or Redá) but only requires a phage annealing protein (RecT or Redâ). Notably, the P22
phage annealing protein Erf, which does not mediate the same DSBR reactions, also delivers ssOR
activity. By altering aspects of the oligonucleotides, we document length and design parameters that
affect ssOR efficiency to show a simple relationship to homologies either side of the repair site.
Notably, ssOR shows strand bias. Oligonucleotides that can prime lagging strand replication deliver
more ssOR than their leading complements. This suggests a model in which the annealing proteins
hybridize the oligonucleotides to single stranded regions near the replication fork. We also show
that ssOR is a highly efficient way to engineer BACs and can be detected in a eukaryotic cell upon
expression of a phage annealing protein.
Conclusion: Phage annealing proteins can initiate the recombination of single stranded
oligonucleotides into endogenous targets in Escherichia coli at very high efficiencies. This expands
the repertoire of useful DNA engineering strategies, shows promise for applications in eukaryotic
cells, and has implications for the unanswered questions regarding DSBR mediated by RecE/RecT
and Redá/Redâ.
Background
In a search for a simple way to use homologous recombination in E. coli for DNA engineering, we found that the
phage protein pairs of either RecE/RecT, from the Rac prophage, or Redá/Redâ from ë, phage, mediate very useful double stranded break repair (DSBR) in the absence of RecBC [1]. Concomitantly, Murphy [2] reported similar findings from studies with ë Red recombination. Notably, we found that this DSBR requires only very short homology regions for efficient recombination and the ratio of homologous to non-homologous recombination is very high [1]. Together with other advantages, these remarkable properties opened a new logic for engineering DNA using recombination in vivo that circumvents many of the limitations inherent with the in vitro use of restriction enzymes, ligases and PCR or the in vivo use of the recA/recBC pathway. A variety of implications have been developed, by us [3–6] and others ([7,8,8–15]; for reviews see [16–18]). Initially we termed this DSBR mechanism "ET recombination" after RecE/RecT, but the alternative terms "Red" after the ë phage proteins, and 'recombineering' are also in use (Copeland et al, 2001). In the interests of clarity, we will refer to homologous recombination in E. coli, mediated by either RecE/RecT or Redá/Redâ in the absence of RecBCD activity, as Red/ET recombination. The Red/ET recombination mechanism is the simplest example
of DSBR yet described with distinct similarity to DSBR in yeast [19]. Like in yeast, it can be employed for
both efficient gene replacement and gap repair using short homology regions [6,20]. Red/ET recombination involves co-operation between a 5'-3' exonuclease (RecE or Redá, see [21] for Redá crystal structure) with a single strand DNA binding and annealing protein (RecT or Redâ, see [22,23] for analyses of these proteins on DNA by electron microscopy). In a comparative mechanistic study, we showed that DSBR initiated by either phage protein pair is functionally and operationally equivalent [24]. This study also revealed that co-operation between the 5'-3' exonuclease and its cognate annealing protein is required, due to a specific protein/protein interaction between the two components. Furthermore, we presented evidence showing that DSBR by Red/ET encompasses two mechanisms, one of which concords with the accepted annealing mechanism [25,26] and another, which remains undefined, could be due to a strand invasion activity. On this point, in vitro binding studies have shown that both RecT and Redâ can mediate strand displacement [27,28]. Here we report an unexpected further activity with single stranded DNA that requires only the single stranded binding proteins, RecT or Redâ. The same activity has been recently reported by Ellis et al [29]. We characterize the activity, here referred to as ssOR for 'single stranded oligo repair', and thereby establish several criteria that distinguish it from Red/ET DSBR. In agreement with the chromosomal studies of Ellis et al, we show that ssOR displays strand bias on pUC plasmid origin targets. Repair by oligos that hybridize with the lagging strand template (lagging) is consistently higher than repair by oligos that hybridize with the leading strand template (leading). This suggests the involvement of the replication fork. Interestingly, ssOR also occurs in eukaryotic chromatin when a phage single strand binding protein is expressed. 

Results
Identification of a novel single strand repair activity
Previously we applied a double-strand break repair (DSBR) assay to analyze aspects of homologous  recombination mediated by the phage protein pairs, RecE/RecT and Redá/Redâ [24]. With the intention to explore the DSBR mechanism further, we developed a DNA repair assay using a mutated kanamycin resistance gene (neo) present in pGKneo (Fig. 1A). pGKneo was cut with Nco1 and either filled in to create a 4 nucleotide insertion (pGKneo*), or resected to create a four nucleotide deletion (pGKneo?). Oligonucleotides (oligos) containing the wild type sequence across the Nco1 site will, if incorporated correctly into pGKneo* or pGKneo?, restore kanamycin resistance and thus be easily detected. Most of the following experiments were performed with both pGKneo templates. Since virtually identical results were obtained for both, except that results with pGKneo* consistently yielded slightly more correctly repaired products, only results obtained with pGKneo? are presented. In the first experiment, a 46 nt double stranded oligo, containing 21 bps of homologous sequences on both sides of the intact Nco1 site, was used to evaluate the frequency of repair in the presence or absence of either RecE/RecT or Redá/Redâ protein pairs. Repair was dependent on expression of phage proteins and both insertion and deletion substrates were suitable (Fig. 1B, and data not shown). Since Red/ET DSBR requires 
linearised, double stranded DNA and does not work with single stranded DNA [1], we expected that the 
corresponding single stranded oligos (ss oligos) would serve as good negative controls in this experiment. Surprisingly, each ss oligo delivered notable levels of phage protein-dependent repair (Fig. 1B). This unexpected result suggested that the phage proteins mediate a repair reaction different from their activities in DSBR and prompted further analysis. In addition to the requirement for double stranded DNA, Red/ET DSBR requires the co-expression of an orthologous phage protein pair, either RecE/RecT or Redá/Redâ [24]. Since the ss oligo repair (ssOR) activity was unexpected, we examined the requirement for expression of an orthologous pair. As also shown in Fig. 1B, ssOR was mediated by either phage annealing protein alone without the need for its orthologous exonuclease partner. This presents a second piece of evidence that the ssOR activity is distinct from Red/ET DSBR. In contrast to the results of Ellis et al [29], ssOR by either annealing protein alone was less efficient than that obtained when the cognate exonuclease partner was co-expressed (Fig. 1B). Since it is unlikely
that the exonuclease activity of RecE or Redá is beneficial, this result may reflect an aspect of the specific
protein/protein interaction between these protein pairs [24,30]. Alternatively, it is possible that the difference between our results and those of Ellis et al on this point reflect an operational aspect of experimental design, such as protein expression levels or stabilities, either in our experiments or those of Ellis et al. Notably, the lagging oligo (that is, the oligo that would prime lagging strand synthesis) delivered better efficiency than the leading for all configurations (Fig. 1B). Also notable is the observation that the double stranded (ds) oligo delivered better efficiency than either ss oligo in all cases. In the cases where either phage protein pair was co-expressed, this appears to be simply the additive outcome of both DSBR and ssOR activities. In the cases in which only one annealing protein was expressed, this may reflect a simple addition of lagging and leading ssOR. Alternatively, it could reflect an operational parameter such as stabilization of the oligos against decay, or a beneficial contribution of a presumptive ds oligo unwinding step. To focus on the ssOR activity, further experiments were performed with ss oligos. To evaluate the requirements for the ssOR activity in more
detail, a series of differently configured E. coli hosts were examined (Table 1). No significant activity could be
found in the absence of a phage annealing protein, including in the wild type E. coli strain, MM294, the recBC
strain JC5519, or recA strain JC9366. Furthermore, no significant activity was found in several sbcBC strains. Importantly, ssOR in the presence or absence of RecBC activity was the same. This conclusion is established by comparing strains with or without RecBC (MM294, JC8679, JC5519, JC9366) and with or without expression of the RecBC inhibitor, Redã [31]. The independence of ssOR from RecBC presents a third operational difference to Red/ET DSBR, since phage DSBR is diminished by the presence of RecBC. The results in Table 1 also show that ssOR on plasmids is independent from RecA, which is neither required nor an impediment.
Interestingly, the P22 phage annealing protein, Erf, also mediates efficient ssOR (Table 1). The P22 recombination system, which includes Erf, Arf, Abc1 and Abc2, shares some mechanistic similarities with that of the RecE/RecT and Redá/Redâ phage protein pairs [32,33] but does not appear to include a 5'-3' exonuclease activity. Consistent with this absence, we have been unable to find notable DSBR activity with any combination of these four P22 proteins (unpublished results). The observation that Erf alone, like RecT and Redâ, delivers ssOR is a fourth piece of evidence that this activity is distinct from Red/ET DSBR.

Discussion
We developed a DNA repair assay to explore further the Red/ET DSBR activity, however unexpectedly observed an activity with single stranded DNA, termed here ssOR (single stranded oligo repair). The two activities differ with respect to required protein expression. Red/ET DSBR requires the co-expression of a phage 5'-3' exonuclease and annealing protein pair [24] whereas ssOR requires only the expression of either phage annealing protein, RecT or Redâ. Consistent with this difference, the P22 phage annealing protein, Erf, which does not appear to have a phage 5'-3' exonuclease partner and does not mediate DSBR, also mediates ssOR.
The simplest explanation for the ssOR reaction is that the oligos serve as primers for DNA replication after the phage annealing proteins establish a hybrid molecule spanning the repair site. A notable characteristic of ssOR is strand bias that concords with the orientation of replication origins. In our plasmid assay, the oligos that would prime lagging strand replication delivered greater efficiencies than those that would prime the leading strand. This characteristic was also noted by Ellis et al [29], who carefully examined the phenomenon at various sites around the E. coli chromosome. They were able to show that ssOR strand bias was independent of the direction of local transcription and simply concordant with the direction of replication. Before their study was published, we had drawn a similar conclusion by integration of the neo* and neo ? repair substrates into the lacZ gene on the E. coli chromosome. Since these results do not extend those of Ellis et al, they have not been included in this paper. The strand bias strongly implicates the asymmetric exposure of single stranded regions at the replication fork [34] as the sites to which the phage annealing proteins establish stable oligo hybrids. If this simple physical explanation, referred to here as the BARF model (Bias Annealing at the Replication Fork; Fig. 6), is sufficient, we reasoned that the phage annealing proteins may be able to mediate ssOR near any replication fork. Testing of this idea in a eukaryotic context provided by mouse ES cells proved encouraging. More work is required to determine whether conditions can be found for useful application of oligo repair mediated by the phage proteins in eukaryotic mutagenesis. Also an interesting possibility to explore involves the use of ssOR strand bias assays using the phage annealing proteins to map replication origins in eukaryotic cells. The limitations and utility of ssOR were examined by use of a variety of differently configured oligos. Several conclusions emerged. First, the efficiency of ssOR requires hybrid formation either side of the repair site and efficiencies increased up to an apparent optimum of 55–65 symmetrically on each side. Shifting the repair site off center reduced repair efficiency, however shifting the repair site towards the 5' end of the oligo was worse than shifting to the 3' end. This indicates that the stability of the 5' end of the oligo hybrid is more important than the stability of the 3' oligo hybrid and suggests that the 5' end of the oligo hybrid serves to block destabilizing influences, such as 5'- 3' helicases or polymerases, and the 3' end of the oligo hybrid serves mainly as a primer for DNA replication. Second, additional mismatches in the oligo decreased repair efficiencies. Furthermore, when these oligos did effect repair, the additional mismatch was not included in most cases. Hence the oligo itself is subject to further editing.

