The kinase MSK1 is required for induction of c-fos by
lysophosphatidic acid in mouse embryonic stem cells
Sebastian Schuck1,2, Ana Soloaga3, Gerhard Schratt1,4, J Simon C Arthur3 and Alfred Nordheim*1
Abstract
Background: The regulation of the immediate-early gene c-fos serves as a paradigm for signalactivated
gene induction. Lysophosphatidic acid is a potent serum-borne mitogen able to induce cfos.
Results: Analysing the signalling events following stimulation of mouse embryonic stem cells with
serum and lysophosphatidic acid, we show that the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
pathway is involved in mediating c-fos induction. We demonstrate that the ERK-activated kinase
MSK1 is required for full c-fos promoter activation, as well as for the phosphorylation of cAMPresponsive
element (CRE) binding proteins. We propose that MSK1 contributes to ERK-mediated
c-fos promoter activation by targeting CRE binding proteins.
Conclusion: These results show that MSK1 is an important ERK-activated mediator of mitogenstimulated
c-fos induction. In addition, they indicate that MSK1 could act through CRE binding
proteins to achieve c-fos promoter activation. Thus, they further our understanding of the complex
regulation of the model immediate-early gene c-fos.
Background
Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is an intercellular mediator involved in inflammation and wound healing [1]. It is released by activated platelets and leukocytes, and is one of the most potent mitogens found in serum. LPA acts
through G-protein-coupled receptors to activate a number of intracellular signalling pathways including mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascades and Rho signalling. This leads to cellular responses such as proliferation, differentiation and suppression of apoptosis. One way in which these effects are mediated is induction of immediate- early genes such as c-fos. The c-fos promoter has been extensively studied as a model
for signal-activated gene induction [2,3]. It contains several regulatory elements, namely a serum response element (SRE), a cAMP-responsive element (CRE), a sis-inducible element, and an AP-1-like site, which serve to integrate input from a host of signalling pathways. These promoter elements are strongly interdependent. Mutation of one of them inhibits c-fos activation through any of the other elements, suggesting that they are connected by protein complexes [4]. The c-fos SRE is constitutively occupied by the transcription factor serum response factor (SRF) [5]. Its presence allows members of the Ets family ternary complex factors (TCFs) to bind to the SRE [6]. A well understood mechanism underlying c-fos induction is phosphorylation of TCFs by MAP kinases, leading to transactivation [2]. SRF bound to SRE reporter genes can also be activated independently
of TCFs by at least two signalling pathways, one involving the small GTPase Rho, while the other is regulated
by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase [7,8]. However, how these pathways contribute to the control of the endogenous
c-fos gene is not clear. In addition, SRF is phosphorylated in a signal-regulated manner by several
kinases, including MAP kinase-activated protein kinase-1 (MAPKAP-K1, also called RSK) and MAPKAP-K2 [9,10]. SRF phosphorylation has been correlated with enhanced DNA binding [9,11], but so far there is no direct evidence for a functional role of SRF phosphorylation. The CRE is bound by CRE binding protein family members, including CREB and ATF1. Upon phosphorylation, they recruit the co-activator CREB binding protein (CBP), thus effecting transactivation. Phosphorylation of CREB can be induced by several distinct pathways. For instance, in response to elevated intracellular cAMP levels, CREB is phosphorylated by protein kinase A. Growth factors and cellular stresses induce CREB phosphorylation by activating downstream targets of the classical extracellular signalregulated kinase (ERK) pathway and the stress-activated p38 pathway, respectively [12]. MAPKAP-K1b/RSK2 was initially thought to be the major growth factor-regulated CREB kinase [13,14], but recent evidence indicates that mitogen- and stress-activated kinases (MSKs) play this role [15–17].
Signal-dependent changes in chromatin structure as part of the nucleosomal response constitute an additional level of regulation [18]. Stimulation rapidly induces histone phosphorylation and acetylation at the loci of immediateearly genes [19]. Histone kinase activity has been shown for both MAPKAP-K1b/RSK2 and MSK1, while CBP possesses histone acetyltransferase activity [20–22]. Therefore, these molecules might play a dual role by contributing to c-fos induction at the level of chromatin remodeling as well as promoter activation.
Transfection experiments have shown that LPA targets the SRE to activate the c-fos promoter. This was proposed to occur through a Rho-dependent pathway, independently of TCFs and MAP kinases [7]. However, a more recent study concluded that induction of the endogenous c-fos gene by LPA requires the ERK pathway, but not Rho signalling [23]. In addition, some c-fos induction by LPA remains in cells that lack SRF and thereby signalling to the SRE [24], indicating that other promoter elements may contribute to c-fos induction.
Here, we analyse the signalling events leading from LPA stimulation to c-fos promoter activation. We confirm that regulation of the endogenous c-fos gene involves the ERK pathway and provide direct genetic evidence for a role of MSK1 in this process. Furthermore, we suggest phosphorylation of CRE binding proteins by MSK1 as a mechanism to link the ERK pathway to the c-fos promoter, thus allowing for SRF-independent c-fos induction.

Results
The ERK pathway is involved in c-fos induction by serum and LPA
Serum-starved wild type (WT) mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells were stimulated with fetal calf serum (FCS) or
LPA. Activation of the major MAP kinases ERK1/ERK2, JNK1/JNK2, and p38 was determined by immunoblotting with phospho-specific antibodies against their T-X-Y activation motifs (Figure 1). ERK1/ERK2 phosphorylation was rapidly induced by both stimuli, followed by a slow decline. Induction of JNK1/JNK2 phosphorylation showed a delayed onset and was less pronounced. Induction of p38 phosphorylation was barely detectable. Given its rapid activation, the ERK pathway could be involved in c-fos induction, which causes an increase of c-fos mRNA within 10 min of serum stimulation [24]. To test this, WT ES cells were stimulated with FCS and LPA in the absence or presence of PD98059, an inhibitor of the ERK pathway [25]. Accumulation of c-fos mRNA after 30 min of stimulation was measured by quantitative RT-PCR (Figure 2a). Induction of c-fos by both stimuli was reduced in the presence of PD98059. Figure 2b shows that PD98059 inhibited ERK activation. It should be noted, however, that PD98059 did not completely block ERK activation in this cell type (data not shown), so that our data may in fact underestimate the importance of the ERK pathway. To further corroborate that the ERK pathway mediates c-fos induction by FCS and LPA, Ro318220 was used to inhibit MAPKAP-K1/RSK and MSK1 [15,26], two downstream targets of ERK1/ERK2 (Figure 2c). Induction of c-fos by both stimuli was strongly inhibited by Ro318220. Therefore, the ERK pathway is involved in c-fos induction by
FCS and LPA in mouse ES cells. In addition, the inhibitory  effect of Ro318220 suggests that signalling through the ERK pathway involves MAPKAP-K1 or MSK1, or both kinases.

MSK1 is required for c-fos induction by serum and LPA 
To examine the potential function of MSK1 in c-fos induction, we first tested whether it can be activated by FCS and LPA in mouse ES cells. Either stimulus activated MSK1 in serum-starved wild type mouse ES cells, as judged by immunoprecipitation kinase assays (Figure 3). This activation was inhibited by PD98059, indicating that it required the ERK pathway. Msk1(-/-) ES cells [16] allowed direct assessment of the role of MSK1 in c-fos induction. Figure 4a shows that c-fos induction as measured by quantitative RT-PCR was reduced
by at least 50% for both stimuli in three different Msk1(-/-) ES cell lines. This was confirmed by RNase protection assays (data not shown). The reduced c-fos induction at 30 min of stimulation could be due to a weaker promoter activation or due to a delayed response. To distinguish between these explanations, induction kinetics of c-fos in wild type and Msk1(-/-) ES cells were measured by semi-quantitative RT-PCR (Figure 4b). The time-course of c-fos induction by LPA in Msk1(-/-) ES cells was identical to that in wild type cells, excluding that disruption of the msk1 gene leads to a delayed c-fos induction. Hence, our data constitute direct genetic evidence that MSK1 is required for the activation of the c-fos promoter.

MSK1 is required for the induction of CREB phosphorylation by serum and LPA
One mechanism of ERK-mediated c-fos induction by MSK1 could be phosphorylation of CREB bound to the
CRE of the c-fos promoter. We therefore tested whether FCS or LPA could induce CREB phosphorylation in ES
cells in an MSK1-dependent manner. In wild type ES cells, both stimuli induced phosphorylation of CREB and the closely related transcription factor ATF1 on serine 133 and serine 63, respectively (Figure 5). In contrast, this

Figure 1
MAP kinase activation in WT ES cells. WT ES cells were serum-starved for 36 h and stimulated with 15% FCS or 20 µM LPA for the times indicated. Cell lysates were electrophoresed and immunoblotted with antibodies recognising the phosphorylated forms of ERK1/ERK2, JNK1/JNK2 and p38 (p-ERK1/2, p-JNK1/2 and p-p38). Antibodies against total ERK1/ERK2 and p38 served as loading controls.

Figure 2
Induction of c-fos in WT ES cells. A – Cells were serumstarved for 36 h and incubated with 25 µM PD98059 during the last hour of starvation where indicated. Cells were stimulated with 15% FCS or 20 µM LPA for 30 min, followed by quantitative RT-PCR. Based on relative mRNA levels, fold
inductions of c-fos were calculated from three independent experiments (FCS: 82.1 ± 27.6, FCS + PD: 43.8 ± 25.7, LPA: 
63.1 ± 43.5, LPA + PD: 39.7 ± 25.2). To eliminate experiment-to-experiment variations in the induction levels and to more clearly show the effect of PD98059, induction without inhibitor was set to 100% for each individual experiment and percent c-fos induction was calculated for the samples treated with inhibitor. B – Cells were serum-starved and treated as in A. Stimulation was done for 10 min and ERK1/ ERK2 phosphorylation was analysed as in Figure 1. C – Cells were serum-starved and treated as in A, except that PD98059 was replaced by 5 µM Ro318220. Fold inductions from three independent experiments were FCS: 76.2 ± 42.0, FCS + Ro: 15.7 ± 10.5, LPA: 67.9 ± 20.3, LPA + Ro: 2.8 ± 1.9. 

Representation of the data as in A. phosphorylation was greatly reduced in ES cells lacking
MSK1, despite normal ERK activation in these cells. CREB and ATF1 expression has previously been shown to be unperturbed in Msk1(-/-) ES cells [16]. Hence, MSK1 is required for the phosphorylation of the CRE binding
proteins CREB and ATF1 after stimulation with FCS and LPA.

Induction of c-fos through the ERK pathway can occur in the absence of SRF
SRF is known to be required for c-fos induction through the ERK pathway, with TCF phosphorylation providing
the link between ERK1/ERK2 and SRF [2]. Only a small induction remains in the absence of SRF [24]. ERK-dependent CRE activation through CREB phosphorylation by MSK1 could provide a mechanism for this residual induction. If this were the case, the residual induction seen in Srf(-/-) cells should still be sensitive to inhibition of the ERK pathway. To test this, Srf(-/-) ES cells [27] were used to measure c-fos induction in the absence or presence of PD98059 or Ro318220 (Figure 6). As observed before, cfos induction was drastically reduced in these cells (data not shown). The residual activation elicited by LPA (about five fold as compared to more than 60 fold in wild type cells) was too small to reliably measure the effects of PD98059 and Ro318220. However, the residual response to FCS was sensitive to inhibition of the ERK pathway, showing that TCF phosphorylation is not the only mechanism by which this pathway contributes to c-fos induction. Therefore, downstream targets of ERK1/ERK2 can activate the c-fos promoter in the absence of SRF. MSK1 might be such a downstream target, linking the ERK pathway to the c-fos promoter by CREB phosphorylation and subsequent CRE activation.

Discussion
In this study, we show that the ERK pathway is involved in LPA signalling to the c-fos promoter in mouse ES cells. We demonstrate that MSK1 is necessary for full c-fos promoter activation as well as for phosphorylation of CRE

